
This is for the Pullman Porters who organized when people said
they couldn’t. And carried the Pittsburgh Courier and the ChicagoDefender to the Black Americans in the South so they would
know they were not alone. This is for the Pullman Porters who
helped Thurgood Marshall go south and come back north to fight
the fight that resulted in Brown v. Board of Education because
even though Kansas is west and even though Topeka is the birth-
place of Gwendolyn Brooks, who wrote the powerful “The
Chicago Defender Sends a Man to Little Rock,” it was the
Pullman Porters who whispered to the traveling men both
the Blues Men and the “Race” Men so that they both would
know what was going on. This is for the Pullman Porters who
smiled as if they were happy and laughed like they were tickled
when some folks were around and who silently rejoiced in 1954
when the Supreme Court announced its 9—0 decision that “sepa-
rate is inherently unequal.” This is for the Pullman Porters who
smiled and welcomed a fourteen-year-old boy onto their train in
1955. They noticed his slight limp that he tried to disguise with a
doo-wop walk; they noticed his stutter and probably understood
why his mother wanted him out of Chicago during the summer
when school was out. Fourteen-year-old Black boys with limps
and stutters are apt to try to prove themselves in dangerous ways
when mothers aren’t around to look after them. So this is for the
Pullman Porters who looked over that fourteen-year-old while
the train rolled the reverse of the Blues Highway from Chicago to
St. Louis to Memphis to Mississippi. This is for the men who kept
him safe; and if Emmett Till had been able to stay on a train all
summer he would have maybe grown a bit of a paunch, certainly
lost his hair, probably have worn bifocals and bounced his grand-
children on his knee telling them about his summer riding the
rails. But he had to get off the train. And ended up in Money,
Mississippi. And was horribly, brutally, inexcusably, and unac-
ceptably murdered. This is for the Pullman Porters who, when the
sheriff was trying to get the body secretly buried, got Emmett’s
body on the northbound train, got his body home to Chicago,
where his mother said: I want the world to see what they did
to my boy. And this is for all the mothers who cried. And this is
for all the people who said Never Again. And this is about Rosa
Parks whose feet were not so tired, it had been, after all, an ordi-
nary day, until the bus driver gave her the opportunity to make
history. This is about Mrs. Rosa Parks from Tuskegee, Alabama,
who was also the field secretary of the NAACP. This is about the
moment Rosa Parks shouldered her cross, put her worldly goods
aside, was willing to sacrifice her life, so that that young man in
Money, Mississippi, who had been so well protected by the
Pullman Porters, would not have died in vain. When Mrs. Parks
said “NO” a passionate movement was begun. No longer would
there be a reliance on the law; there was a higher law. When Mrs.
Parks brought that light of hers to expose the evil of the system,
the sun came and rested on her shoulders bringing the heat and
the light of truth. Others would follow Mrs. Parks. Four young
men in Greensboro, North Carolina, would also say No. Great
voices would be raised singing the praises of God and exhorting
us “to forgive those who trespass against us.” But it was the
Pullman Porters who safely got Emmett to his granduncle and it
was Mrs. Rosa Parks who could not stand that death. And in not
being able to stand it. She sat back down.
***
maybe there is something about the seventh of June: Gwen,
Prince and me . . . or maybe people just have to be born at some
time . . . and there are only three hundred sixty-five days or three
sixty-six every four years or so . . . meaning that some things
happen at the same time in the same rising sign . . . and the same
houses in Gemini . . . but some of us might also consider the
possibility of reincarnating revolving restructuring that spirit . . .
reshaping that spirit . . . releasing that spirit . . . tucking the use-
less inside and when the useless pushes out again we restructure
again and poetry and song and praisesong go on  . . . because it is
the right thing to do
 
we always will cry when a great heart . . . a good soul . . . one of
the premier poets of her age restructures . . . reincarnates  . . .
revolves into a resolve that we now carry in our hearts . . . as all
great women and men are alive . . . not by biology but remem-
brance . . . and that’s all right . . . as the old folk say . . . because as
long as they stay on the lips . . . they nestle in our hearts and those
souls which are planted . . . continue growing . . . until generations
not knowing their touch . . . their voice . . . or even the fact
that some Chicago poets are terrible cooks . . . but always fun
to eat with . . . will tell tales of having met someone who knew
someone who once watched a basketball game . . . in which some
Chicago poet cheered for Seattle at the request of some Virginia
poet who wanted more games . . . while Mr. Blakely was amazed
that a Chicago poet was even watching a game . . . and didn’t
we miss him as he slipped away watching baseball . . . and what
a way to go . . . though we then did sort of know . . . that once
gone . . . he would call the woman he loved
 
and so we come to no more phone calls at six a.m. to chat ...
and no more Benihana when we are all in New York . . . and no
more gossiping and questioning and trying to make sense of a
senseless world . . . no more face-to-face . . . only the poetry which
is a great monument from this Topeka daughter to the world . . .
and yet . . . there can be no complaints in this passing . . . no
sorrow songs . . . no if onlys . . . it is all here: the work the love:
the woman: who gave and gave and gave . . . no complaints of too
long or too hard . . . no injustice of accident or misunderstanding
of disease . . . just one great woman moving to the next phase . . .
and us on the ground . . . giving Alleluias
***
It is appropriate that I sing The song of the feet   The weight of the body And what the body chooses to bear Fall on me   I trampled the American wilderness Forged frontier trails Outran the mob in Tulsa Got caught in Philadelphia   And am still unreparated   I soldiered on in Korea Jungled through Vietman sweated out Desert Storm Caved my way through Afghanistan Tunneled the World Trade Center   And on the worst day of my life Walked behind JFK Shouldered MLK Stood embracing Sister Betty   I wiggle my toes In the sands of time Trusting the touch that controls my motion Basking in the warmth of the embrace Day’s end offers with warm salty water   It is appropriate I sing The praise of the feet   I am a Black woman
***
I want to believe we can’t see anything we don’t have a word for.   When I look out the window and say green, I mean sea green, I mean moss green, I mean gray, I mean pale and also electrically flecked with white and I mean green in its damp way of glowing off a leaf.   Scheele’s green, the green of Renaissance painters, is a sodium carbonate solution heated to ninety degrees as arsenious oxide is stirred in. Sodium displaces copper, resulting in a green precipitate that is sometimes used as insecticide. When I say green I mean a shiny green bug eating a yellow leaf.   Before synthetics, not every painter could afford a swathe of blue. Shocking pink, aka neon, aka kinky pink, wasn’t even on the market. I want to believe Andy Warhol invented it in 1967 and ever since no one’s eyes have been the same. There were sunsets before, but without that hot shocking neon Marilyn, a desert sky was just cataract smears. I want to believe this.   The pale green of lichen and half-finished leaves filling my window is a palette very far from carnation or bougainvillea, but to look out is to understand it is not, is to understand what it is not. I stare out the window a lot. Between the beginning and the end the leaves unfolded. I looked out one morning and everything was unfamiliar as if I was looking at the green you could only see if you’d never known synthetic colors existed.   I’ve drawn into myself people say. We understand, they say.   There are people who only have words for red and black and white, and I wonder if they even see the trees at the edge of the grass or the green storms coming out of the west. There are people who use the same word for green and red and brown, and I wonder if red seems so urgently bright pouring from the body when there is no green for it to fall against.   In his treatise on color Wittgenstein asked, “Can’t we imagine certain people having a different geometry of colour than we do?”   I want to believe the eye doesn’t see green until it has a name, because I don’t want anything to look the way it did before.   Van Gogh painted pink flowers, but the pink faded and curators labeled the work “White Roses” by mistake.   The world in my window is a color the Greeks called chlorol. When I learned the word I was newly pregnant and the first pale lichens had just speckled the silver branches. The pines and the lichens in the chill drizzle were glowing green and a book in my lap said chlorol was one of the untranslatable words. The vibrating glow pleased me then, as a finger dipped in sugar pleased me then. I said the word aloud for the baby to hear. Chlorol. I imagined the baby could only see hot pink and crimson inside its tiny universe, but if you can see what I’m seeing, the word for it is chlorol. It’s one of the things you’ll like out here.   Nineteenth century critics mocked painters who cast shadows in unexpected colors. After noticing green cypresses do drop red shadows, Goethe chastised them. “The eye demands completeness and seeks to eke out the colorific circle in itself.” He tells of a trick of light that had him pacing a row of poppies to see the flaming petals again and figure out why.   Over and over again Wittgenstein frets the problem of translucence. Why is there no clear white? He wants to see the world through white-tinted glasses, but all he finds is mist.   At first I felt as if the baby had fallen away like a blue shadow on the snow.   Then I felt like I killed the baby in the way you can be thinking about something else and drop a heavy platter by mistake.   Sometimes I feel like I was stupid to have thought I was pregnant at all.   Color is an illusion, a response to the vibrating universe of electrons. Light strikes a leaf and there’s an explosion where it lands. When colors change, electromagnetic fields are colliding. The wind is not the only thing moving the trees.   Once when I went into those woods I saw a single hot pink orchid on the hillside and I had to keep reminding myself not to tell the baby about the beautiful small things I was seeing. So, hot pink has been here forever and I don’t even care about that color or how Andy Warhol showed me an orchid. I hate pink. It makes my eyes burn.
***
When the strange girl skips rope her hair flies like a porpoise. She collects things that melt and things that tick, circles and cubes and checkerboards in a drawer   she can pull out from her navel. Other children, alerted by the rumble of marbles in her chest, chase her across the field. She insists she is only   hungry, but they pin her down and open her up. Cockroaches rush out and bullies run and squeal, crushing carapaces underfoot. She gathers as many as she can,   tells them she’s sorry there is no lock. She’s sorry, but good children shouldn’t have secrets.  
***
You are afraid of the dark, for which you blame the raccoons, or more to the point, your father, who took you and your mother into the night with a flashlight and shotgun, then left with both, while you held her shaking hand. You would follow your father to the end of the world, those distant birch woods where raccoons rustle and flash their green eyes. His gun was firing into the persimmon trees and the rain of leaves and ripe fruit fell farther and farther, until only the crackle of his shots and the distant baying of the hounds could be heard. The raccoons came then to hiss all around: he left you, he left you, and now you are ours.
***
When I tell you I love the song “Edelweiss” you have to understand that even though I too am a sophisticate who scorns musicals, I was once a little girl who stood in my grand- father’s living room singing, Cuckoo!Cuckoo! while he sipped his scotch and laughed at my preciosity. And when I sing the lyrics in your ear—Small andbright, clean and white,you look happy to meet me—you have to understand my grandfather only ever had one friend, a jeweler who also drank scotch, and left his $10,000 Rolex to my grandfather, who wore it even though it turned his wrist green, wore it to the funeral, where the daughter sang in her ethereal voice. Blossomof snow may you bloomand grow, bloom and growforever. She couldn’t take her eyes off the casket. You have to understand that my grandfather kept spinning that heavy gold around his wrist, and when he raised his voice to join in, he cried to sing it. Edelweiss, edelweiss,bless my homeland forever.
***
I brought what I knew about the world to my daily life and it failed me. I brought senseless accidents and a depravity sprung inside the jaw. Also I brought what I had learned of love, an air of swift entrance and exit, a belief in trouble and desire. It will amount to something I was told, and I was told to hold fast to decency, to be spotlit and confident. I was told next year’s words await another voice. But you are a hard mouth to speak to and if I write the list it will be free of constancy. It will include fierce birds, false springs, a few oil lamps that need quickly to be lit. Also dusk and weeds and a sleep that permits utter oblivion from our stranded century. This is not a natural world, and if there are recoveries from confusion, they pass like rains. I don’t look to the robins for solace; neither do I trust that to make an end is to make a beginning. If we are not capable of company, we can at least both touch the quartet inside evening, the snow inside the willow, the bewildering kinship of ice and sky. But as I walked I saw crows ripping at shapes on the street, a square of sunlight flare on the roof. Take my hand, if only here and not in the time that remains for us to spend together. We will stand and watch the most delicate weathers move, second by second, through the grim neighborhood. I will lean into you, who have loved me in your way, knowing where you are and what you care for.
***
So here are the strange feelings that flicker in you or anchor like weights in your eyes. Turn back and you might undo them, the way trees seem to float free of themselves as they root. A swan can hold itself on the gray ice water and not waver, an open note upon which minor chords blur and rest. But it was born dark. The shore of that lake is littered with glass. How you came to be who you are was all unwinding, aimless on a bike, off to retrieve a parcel that could only be a gift, and felt, as a child, the sea weave around your feet, white light rushing in with the surf. What lived there?                                 —Joy, dispatched from nowhere, and no need to think about your purpose, and no fear that the sun gliding down might burn the earth it feeds. Black habitat of now in which decimation looks tender. Sometimes the call of a bird is so clear it bruises my hands. At night, behind glass, light empties out then fills a room and the people in it, hovering around a fire, gorgeous shapes of wind leaning close to each other in laughter. From this distance, they are a grace, an ache. The kingdom inside.
***
THE DEEP EVENING-COLORED ROSE of the sea is closing. Sweet crude oil, orange as rust, finds an open pathway into the marsh. And what you thought would be your home, lush with grasses, is no home, drives you out into the gray-glazed gates of sleep. Blood flowers where we don’t see it. And every chance event is a high note racing from stars in sea-depths of brightness, and every shock we feel we feel only with the slack ropes of our arms. Someone wants to hide the body of oil and cannot. Someone wants to hide their hands from shame. Shark, dolphin, manatee, fish, each slick skin an undreamt tine threading its red flute-dusk through fumes. Sound of the flood-dark pulse. Then the second when the water makes no sound.     THE OLD VANDALS WERE FLOODS AND BOATS eroding the banks. The islands that once dotted the bays have sunk, disappearing into silverish grit, thinned into algae and filament now being made quiet by plumes. Despite ourselves we are made quiet. The death of the sea a thing we must lower ourselves into to imagine. I will stay with you here inside the sheen of orange that quickly kills, not like the saltwater slowly starving the freshwater- marshes and grasses that knit this green-wet world together. The two breathless gannets found covered in oil are not unlike you, at the mercy of a mercy that moves in plumes, that insists certain fates remain invisible. What existed before the oil arrived was delicate and mired, a broom of moonlight swept through half-choked waves. I trust you if you wish for what it, too, might have been.     LEADING INTO THE BAY are soft green expanses of grasses, saltwater channels, slicks not glimpsed here before. The birds bathe where they can, in half-damp shadows that make possible the next free climb into air. There is nothing beyond our means to feel it— oil pushing up to the surface where the surface-dwellers die, turtles pulling in from the Gulf for nesting. If I close my eyes I can hear the faint blue traces of blood over-gathered by oil and the sound of ice near the seafloor.   There will be a time when nothing living moves, a degradation of stillness beyond any liquid scar. Still, the solutions of despair are weak if you believe you can touch an undersea reef, the belly of a small wounded whale. You have the power to feel it. The breath of the animal moving like trust into your arms.     BEFORE THE HOUR WHEN THE COAST slid into ocean we thought we saw a patch of sun greening in waves. The slip of a fish. There was a need so deep in our bodies we could not even weep. We called for an end and that end did not come. Power after power, our machine tools and cutting tools did nothing to hold back the brown clouds rippling in chaotic columns toward the light. And what the skies mean, passing over beds of tarred seaweed, feels unutterable, like the darkness around a candle. Where had we hoped to live? You came into the month with dreams. You walked on those beaches even though you knew they were sick. The bird that sought the reeds to die in, the fish gill-soaked with oils— you gathered them into yourself as if you alone could bring back their flickering. And overhead the novae exploded toward you along tracks of gas and dust, and the fields of ocean rose into you, and the crabs broke from their cancer fossils in masses of tiny flowers and you felt inside you the islands re-arise, flushed from the thickening imbalance of the earth. (Is there some refuge beyond ourselves that is vast enough? The sea is without grief. As are the days.)
***
Robins in the cottonwoods, holding still as the thin snow comes. The sun seems to flood them with blood. They have settled in the empty branches while the storm-lamps spit in your limbs, red evening swinging across the sky then dropping, ragged, into your frame to stay with you as you move and smile and have opinions. Then a woman’s torso white with dawn— their rich perch is yours, there is nothing you need to expect or retrieve, like warm fields floating toward an invisible moon. A person learns stone-throated composures and barters for days of calm weather, like a man in a dream who understands the answering pressure of eyes—you ask too much. But the birds are not reckless. Every minute their fat shapes are filling with sun, and I apprentice myself to their candor. Their bodies drift on the moving branches, solid— they are not taking and keeping. They are not torn papers in a rumor of wind, their small backs brown fields holding thunderclouds up. Inside their bodies, nothing falls to the earth and dies.
***
When I found your face on a pillow of leaves you had already erased it. A nest so heavy can stay in the heavens only by reversal.   By this law the knees are laced with abandon.   I said to the young man.   If watching is the manufacturer, and I lose you what angel takes the place of a dowry or distance in this leaf action?        Subject to like passions as we are my soul herself, myself a possession I could not mistake for the man (his language and Latin) yet we are “taken to” a love passage I had hardly noticed in the late talk of money The work of love and the work of art has no sleeping part Is a drop of light in a small silver socket, a rosy dime in a daylight tryst Is a keeper and no spender As seeing who is invisible: a kind of flaxen thing caught in stone I obeyed and read further “I am hemmed” Though my heart were a pear tree threaded with fire Lion you leapt through me like fineness in the boundary gene         Conductor you knit me as isthmus     Can I touch it Night is going 200 miles an hr as usual     In this way we find we are suddenly altered If I were a day would you like me better     Where were you you who in a bath changed meHow to be walking is a glorious porthole Must I insist on an absence more foolish and secret When your timber’s a forest I can’t see for the tree in my bed Gentle captive, it is a larger than murder we tender     Fond and afire my style and my anchor Master there’s a boat for no lesser completion than beauty’s sweetest dress when you look on me kind Who am I to stop this flowing Least of all that home mile Sinking in the real I dreamed there was a further island Perhaps (how I thought you) to salt that harness with pleasure         Lovely hero where the lovely hero bounds an acre hidden between eros and its errors Finding a dozen darts beneath the skin of Watching the wire of a skinny flame No other lovely hero found the back behind her secret form of symmetry Her gleaming difference Her schoolish way in pretty understandings Said   Not done   Not said   Undone Wealthy sadness has a way of winning everyone This is the end of my body as you know it its superfluous penchant for love its poorer costume, its shiny disaster         What is a maiden,                          boatswain, but a fiery lair and a teary citadel By the smallest shipwreck a daughter is laughter Yet equaled                          as in a fable this Gibraltar goes headlong in a just king’s love See how his hands are her mercy and measure her number and rescue O Perseus     Pythagoras     Pierre my Pierre         What rules a body’s buried factions when laundered by morning   When called by our names although we are invisible   Sleeping I forget my animal When the animal comes I’m forgotten because of it   How was it called in its own country   crossing a street in order to come inside  
***
sleeps into heaven with his lamps on, finishing explan- atory negotiations for a while. Desert the enemy. Star formations, sandstone understanding, rock time in gen- eral, whatever. Latching onto ecstasy, words that change on waking, clover as a syrup of spring mind. Working off a deficit of sleep or cash, you know who your friends are. Singled out in traffic, lurching into light, having lunch. You’re a little one with sand in your eyes, with green on your horn, with milk on your chin. With flow- ering ears and hearsay.  
***
It’s turneresque in twilight. The word comes at me with its headlights on, so it’s revelation and not death. I figure I’m halfway home though I’ve only started. Nothing is moving but me: I’m a blackbird. The neigh- bor’s in labor, but so am I, pushing against the road. Physics tells us nothing is lost, but I’ve been copping time from death and can’t relent for every job the stars drop on my back.
***
Let’s go out and buy something. In the sun.   No, let’s stay home and make something, the sun floods the room. It could be green, on paper. It could be money. That’s the way to create new matter.   That’s how I detach boats from moorings—my boat, my mooring—      the harbor shallow in low tide   skiff propelled over buffeting sands flats on   sheer puissance.
***
there are some things up there uptown   I want to see   I want to see    I'm going to look at that and see   I want to go up and see   that show. That show   I went to see, I went to see.   There are some things up   there   uptown   I want to   look at that and see. I'm going to see   what I look. What I look at, when I look, vessel,   I stood to see. I went to stand to look   to see. Venturing further I went outside myself to look at that wall. It fed! There was a box inside that was not blank, I saw it. It was really different from an aura, the thing had   colors, the thing was talking   to itself. And spoke   to me, not incidentally.  
***
Careening over the highway in my lightweight Japanese Death Star buffeted by the great and powerful winds   icy winds of winter warming cold air with hot air under it   accordion pleats of natural disaster my disaster   in the past if you were to say to me   or to rage at me in a poem about America I would charge you a great failure   to even use the word. It is banality this land is suffering because poets—   their great cohort—     I look twice to save lives.  
***
One thing I’m not doing in my poems: reporting on anything that really happened.   When I say I’m from New York, Glaswegians say, “Oh, I love Woody Allen.” They cannot construe how large a state can be. I just happen to actually be from Manhattan.   How impractical, to imagine that a structure like a government would be responsive to the needs of such a lot of people. Held like in a holding pen.   In the early 1990s I saw a yellow Indian drunk in a tattoo parlor in Seattle. He literally said he could literally see right through me. If he said it figuratively I took it literally.   A lot of people in America do not want regulation from the government. In principle: our forefathers, our persecution. Ideally we wouldn’t need industries and individual actions to be regulated. We wouldn’t even need laws.   People, including people who run corporations or work for them, would just behave responsibly. Corporations would take the responsibility of personhood seriously.   My mother cannot be trusted to restrict me from buying R-rated videogames at the porn store.   My mother struggled to love me—the firstborn had been so tractable—she still struggles to love me—can she be commanded to love me? Now I see what those commandments are about. There must be a God.   Objectively we could expect that our family members would go out of their way to behave toward us with extra care, concern, and with love.   Sometimes there is a harsh disjunction between what objective perception would suggest to us we might expect and what really takes place, or “occurs,” within the framework of what we call “our lives.”   I really saw the other day for the first time that my mother did not naturally take to me—I am not much like her. It would take an effort for her to understand what matters to me. (Her love will come around.)   My own daughter is quite different from me—I think—it’s hard to tell, she is only five years old. But she looks different—takes after her father, as I took after mine—and so far her concerns are not my own. She loves pink. I hate pink. (My love moves faster.)   Where would that moral activity come from, to behave responsibly toward others? Not to overcharge, not to seek loopholes, not to dominate, not to oppress. Does anyone consciously oppress? I guess some spousal abuse comes from the pure urge to dominate, and the ire that results when that domination is resisted, or thwarted . . .   But is it a pure urge or is it coming from an inscribed narrative of gendered hierarchy? Like a man wearing a wife-beater has been told too many times that his wife is supposed to listen to him and obey him. Now if he can be told by the government that “My Strength Is Not for Hurting,” a local billboard campaign, maybe that will ring in his ears when he lifts his fist.   If the government doesn’t do it, who will do it? The church used to do it, and still does. The one time I went to church, with my mother, in Tennessee, when we were at a family reunion and the whole family had certain activities, and one of them was “church on Sunday,” I was brought to tears by the simple goodness of the message that the pastor, or reverend —minister?—this was a Methodist church—was preaching. It was Father’s Day, actually, and he talked about how fathers ought to make sure to spend time with their kids. Turn off the TV, he said, and spend some time with your kids.   I was crying because I am not used to an experience of shared instruction in goodness. It was very moving to be in a room with real people all receiving the same instruction.
***
I mean this thing   I want to write and no other   You will not be so clever   as to resurrect the feathered   the tatty wings of a costumed   angel in my dining room   tatty spatial realm   room where I exist and look at things and eat them   and float nine inches above the floor   and no one else need know   and no other poet   will do       The poet will do   what the poet will do and mime   or maim the poet   meme—in fancy   venue or classroom or focus   group the wings of the poet   relax and warm and shed and oracular   shit out the window in a pile by the side of the road   and the commitment of the poet   to engage, subvert, refract, or remand   is safe in my vagina at last where it belongs.  
***
I can play songs in my head Yes I can perfectly replicate   (the) full-on orchestral every note (when the lights / do down / in the city) yet I cannot   compose, for example   and though when I was young I believed   that the fullness meant I could recreate the sounds I heard in my head with my mouth   I learned through painful iteration painfully unsatisfactory   shameful the rendition   so partial almost unrelated the qualities are: note tone scale register vocality musicality incapacity painfully shy of representation is there anyone?   who is a record player
***
Now as the farmer sits at his accounts Reviewing fleeces neath deciduous beeches And notes in red contented ink Net profits of his quite impossible serenity; As graded apples marketably beautiful Into the bushel-baskets sink And trussed hay to the tin roof reaches, And where red tiles through darkening trees are reared A whole year's work is sold in sacks of meal; Now suddenly running Drops like a sprig Of oak in a gale on the neck The little wriggler, Vindictive-legged cunning, Drops like a fleck Of blood on a finger ring Crooking in his sting. It wriggles and stops, Wriggles and turns Through copper ferns Through stubble of crops Into the garden of his most impossible serenity. Chrysanthemums Wilt in alarm As dangerous comes Its arching arm A probable harm Nearer to his impossible serenity. Brambles turn sour Berries crinkle All fruits, Every flower, All roots wrinkle: The trees' atour Lapses, and the power Of his impossible serenity Collapses. The scorpion poison grips, its patterns spread Like wine that trickling on a dusty floor Hence and thence makes pellets and canals. Asphodel, improbable, beside the river bed Is found rank ramsons with a garlic smell. And cider in a dirty cask, lovelike, turns vinegar. Where had been pears and pippins, is a row of rotten balls, Globes of mundungus, faced with foul fungus, And locusts swarm to make the end complete. The last bee disembowelled waves its dislocated feet. Diseased the last elm falls, and with it falls The indistinct last glint of Dionysus Lysius. Earth is with scorpions like spiders hung. From every tile and brick they flick Like leaping twisting mixing flies on dung. A pretty virgin makes a pretty shrew, As those lo longer virgins also do, Because they are no longer so, or else because they are. The fracasado, self-considering as from far, By force of self-perverted scales Pities himself for impotence, and rails Oftener therefore: more he pities, more he fails. The scolding wife drives man to keep a scolding whore: If either dies, he grieves because she scolds no more, And scorns the other still because she scolds. The man whose one wife makes him ten cuckolds Wishes the girl were plain: she finds no joys In playing with her multiplicated boys, Wishes herself plain too, to find her joy in one. Whose wife Is dutiful and bashful all her life Thinks he would be happier if she were loved by other men. Surely some wit usurps the throne of Cypris, when Woman so seems what never woman was, For man to caper to as man should not. The golden mean is not. The man of business bonded to his trade Postpones his culture till his fortune has been made. The cultured man to realize his will Can find no means, nor wherewithal to touch His learning, since his culture costs too much. Reformers, visionaries, poets, other such, Because their vision real is, too sane their wit, The multitude they seek to benefit Lunatic calls them: and although they spurn Others' opinions, lunatic for lack of heed they turn, Parodying their visions of perfection. The land, too stupid to desire a change, Too lazy for that mental insurrection, Yet knowing their salvation lies In broader education Like cats enough uneasy to surmise They have the mange, Further enlightenment refuses And its chief men accuses Of unenlightenment, With consequent Stagnation. Over its losses Autumn its mosses Draws: the dormice go to sleep. In the shorter afternoons Determined to forget, the caterpillars crawl Into the weak oblivion of cocoons. To easier life the coward birds have all Flown from the towns and woods and pools: But some remain at large, poor ignorant fools. The bats are wiser, who hang upside down, Less crazily inverted than the town: Snails in cement immure their sleepy souls: Less mad, though timid, are the celibate Ferns that abide the next arriving spring To unroll fronds again, when warblers sing, Meantime intelligently hibernate, And delicately, Up to date. But we as leaves evacuate a lime Cannot deceive ourselves nor bide our time: Forced to retire by buds that seize our place, Self-superannuated, in disgrace, Know but too well that what we most deride In others is the poison on our side, Stung by the poison we ourselves put up Ourselves the poisoned cup We give our intellectual pride To sup. A scorpion drops from a unicorn's nape Into the virgin's lap. A scorpion drops from blood Xanthippê's tongue And Socratês though he have wrung A whole night's liquor from a score kulixes And sadly his wine mixes, Drinking all below the table, Wanders, constitutionally unable To drink himself unwise. Yes, even him approaching now to weigh these things The scorpion stings. This belt of fretted stars that so promiscuously plays Upon our eyes, we learn to name them all, Picking our favourites out like horses in a race. But now their steady passages recall How, geared to the years, They tick our lives out: and we cease to see Much hope in false futurity: Instead we falsify stars that have been With promise that we alter since those stars, Raising reality Not in what we see, Nor in what meteors there yet may be, But in fixed stars we would we once had seen.  
***
It was hardly war, the hardliest of wars. Hardly, hardly. It occurred to me that this particular war was hardly war because of kids, more kids, those poor kids. The kids were hungry until we GIs fed them. We dusted them with DDT. Hardly done. Reha- bilitation of Korea, that is. It needs chemical fertilizer from the States, power to build things like a country. In the end it was the hardliest of wars made up of bubble gum, which GIs had to show those kids how to chew. In no circumstance whatever can man be comfortable without art. They don’t want everlasting charity, and we are not giving it to them. We are just lending them a hand until they can stand on their own two feet. A novel idea. This is why it occurred to me that this particular war was hardly war, the hardliest of wars.     My father was hardly himself during the war, then I was born during the era that hardly existed, and, therefore, I hardly existed without DDT. Beauty is pleasure re- garded as the quality of a thing. I prefer a paper closet with real paper dresses in it. To be born hardly, hardly after the hardliest of wars, is a matter of debate. Still going forward. We are, that is. Napalm again. This is THE BIG PICTURE. War and its masses. War and its men. War and its machines. Together we form THE BIG PIC- TURE. From Korea to Germany, from Alaska to Puerto Rico. All over the world, the US Army is on the alert to defend our country, you the people, against aggression. This is THE BIG PICTURE, an official television report to the nation from the army. This is Korea! Is one thing better than another? These South Koreans are all right. Woe is you, woe is war, hardly war, woe is me, woe are you? My father is still alive, and this is how I came to prefer a paper closet with real paper dresses in it.     Well, it’s morning in Korea. The most violently mountainous place on Earth. Every- one has been dusted, existence hardly done, whereas beauty has been regarded as the quality of a thing. At Uncle Dann’s Huddle doughnuts and coffee are free and in case there are any, for there are many, the unescorted ladies are not permitted. The decision has been made in Tokyo for the hardliest of wars, an old soldier made it. The situation in Korea is so critical that we the Navy must give the Eighth Army prac- tical support. Do you remember how you began this day? How did you spend this morning? Woe are you? Well, pinecones fall every day. So why do we fail? Miles and miles of homeless refugees set adrift by the Red scourge. 
***
Beauty=Nation Ugly=Nation Ladies Garden in Progress The American Visitors The New American Word The Beauty of Publicity Mother’s Mop Head Ring spots Sway Me Yes, Ma’am Gossamer=Blouse Yankee=Blouse Yes, Ma’am Sway Me Father, nice to see you Major, it’s been a hell of a ride General M & General H Mother’s Mop Head I see ring spotsThat’s a good sight for my old eyes Yes, Ma’am Ray-Ban Sunglasses So Sway Me Sway Me Oh Sway Me 1. Parade of the Japanese Colonial Government’s Monitors 2. Parade of the First Republic’s ROK Monitors 3. Parade of the DPRK Communist Monitors 4. Parade of the Joint ROK-UN Forces Monitors Yes, Ma’am Did I tell you I saw corpses piled up inside the well in Pyongyang? Did I tell you I helped the Communist Monitor who was also a Colonial Monitor, ROK Monitor, then later an ROK-UN Monitor drag the corpse of his brother? Monitor=For Life! General=For Life! President=For Life! However, I see buttons and ring spots Father, Hiroshima and Nagasaki Major, snap out of it. It’s August 15, 1948 He’s smiling at me Fun Hydrangeas Gossamer=Blouse and Yankee=Blouse Warmly greeted one another I see Ugly=Translators Yes, Ma’am Me=Gook  
***
Here comes Shitty Kitty en route to the Gulf of Tonkin or en route to a race riot? That is the question and meanwhile discipline is the keystone and meanwhile did you see on TV helicopters being ditched into the sea? That is also my film and meanwhile all refugees must be treated as suspects. Looking for your husband? Looking for your son? That is the question and meanwhile she was the mother of the boy or that is what the translator said or Shitty Kitty or shall we adhere to traditional concepts of military discipline tempered with humanitarianism? That is the question and meanwhile South Korea exports military labor left over from the war. That is also my history or is that your history? That is the question and meanwhile             (CHORUS: Dictator Park Chung Hee and his soldiers in Ray-Bans)             How much?           $7.5 million=per division           or Binh Tai massacre=$7.5 million           or Binh Hoa massacre=$7.5 million           or Dien Nien—Phuoc Binh massacre=$7.5 million           or Go Dai massacre=$7.5 milion           or Ha My massacre=$7.5 million           or Phong Nhi & Phong Nhat massacre=$15 million           or Tay Vinh massacre=$7.5 million           or Vinh Xuan massacre=$7.5 million           or Mighty History? That is the question and meanwhile a riot began over a grilled cheese sandwich at Subic Bay. Discrimination or perception? That is the question and meanwhile the sailor refused to make a statement or translate? That is the question and meanwhile twenty-six men all black were charged with assault and rioting and meanwhile did you translate? That is my question and meanwhile lard or Crisco? Aye, aye, sir!              (Anti-CHORUS: kittens in frilly white bonnets, bibs, and mittens)                                                           K I T T Y  S O N G                                                        I, aye-aye-sir!                                                   I, crazy-daisy-sir!                                                 I, export-quality-sir!                                                    I, grill-grill-sir!                                                 I, meow-meow-sir!                                                   I, kitty-litter-sir!
***
The television in The Deer Hunter is in Clairton, Pennsylvania. Everything is still at Welsh’s Lounge: the clouds, the sky, the unlit neon sign outside the window. All is calm, all is bright. I sing in English while my father is in Vietnam. American wives are in immeasurable pain and so is my mother. American soldiers are pushing a hel- icopter to the right side of the TV screen. Behind the soldiers is number 19. It stands for USS Hancock: its nickname, Fighting Hannah. Helicopter whirring. It sounds like Godzilla crying. My father is nowhere to be seen because he’s behind the camera, behind the lens. His eye’s filled with the green ocean. It zooms in on the soldiers, some in uniform, some shirtless, on the decks with number 19 behind them. They’re calm and bright, looking down at the flight platform below. Nobody is crying. Num- ber 19 goes beyond Yi Sang’s number 13. History is hysterical. The-13th-child-also- says-it’s-terrifying. 13+3+3. 19=13. A modest, shared hallucination. I’m still the 13th child. And Godzilla is still crying. Hannah ditches the helicopter in the sea. Now everything is happening on the left side of the screen. Nobody’s in the cockpit of the helicopter. The chopper blades tilt, making a diagonal line across the entire screen. That strange cry. It wants to go home—O like me, like my father. Now the helicopter and its blades are perfectly vertical to the South China Sea. The chopper is now engulfed by the sea, white with foam. Sayonara, Saigon! THIS SEEMS TO BE THE LAST CHAPTER IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICAN INVOLVEMENT IN VIET- NAM. Now everything appears in the center of the screen. Helicopter is everything. Hannah is everything. My father’s framing never sways even when flowers call to him. He edits as he films, he often told me. He’s still nowhere to be seen. Missing in action somewhere in Cambodia, filming carpet bombing, my mother said. O the chopper’s belly convulses. O it’s in immeasurable pain. The chopper’s door open and the pilot and men in white shirts and dark pants spill out. IT’S ALSO BEEN THE LARGEST SINGLE MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE IN THE HISTORY OF AMERICA IT- SELF. The chopper’s blades are swirling in every frenzied direction. O suicidal lines. Sayonara, Saigon! HILARY BROWN, ABC NEWS ABOARD THE ATTACK AIRCRAFT CARRIER USS HANCOCK IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA. White with foam. Now I see buttons on History's blouse.
***
Did a slave song at a master’s bidding mark Tom while asleep in Charity's womb? The whole plantation would be called to sing and dance in Master Epps’ large parlor room— after work sprung from dawn and dragged past dusk, after children auctioned to parts unknown, after funerals and whippings. Thus was the whim of the patriarch. No groans allowed, just high steppin’ celebration, grins all around, gritted or sincere. Charity threw feet, hips, arms into motion to please the tyrant piano. Was it here Tom learned how music can prove the master? While he spun in a womb of slavish laughter?
***
Supervises over the teatable our voluble hostess The passing round of titterings and toasties. Her glass-eyed friends, confidence's make-and-breaks, Give each in series gobbets of another's cakes. Dough drips into their tight triangular shoes. Their mouths give vent to evil-smelling news Keep their minds pure, make mental products crisper, With speaking eyeball rolls and the not too improper whisper. Fawn-eyed, the daughter, a gossip apprentice, Festoons gilt malice on her unmalicious twenties. Holiday smarmed the manureminded ephebus Sees in every skirt lubricity's rebus. Sex is their unknown god, with neither purity nor pox, To whom they genuflect whenever they enjoy their shocks. A little of everything, is the note they strike, The only limitation, what they think they do not like. Always they suffer inexpressible injustices, Making their own beds, these amateur Procrusteses, But expect their maids to lie in them. The middle classes Must have some defence against the vulgar masses. They have no use for idle gossips that scarify: But in their own leisure get together to verify Rumours of rationalists, use of contraceptives, Probable bastards, hope of their proving defectives (Details being perquisites of good detectives). This of course for the parish's sake. These long nose weevils Seek knowledge of others', as expression of their own, evils: And naught escapes being twisted and messed, Their own souls included, on matters of interest. Ignorant, superficial, malignant, self-deceived, Ashamed to bear, but proud to be bereaved, Devoted to truth's medals, but dismayed to see its flesh— Babies are born to them in prams and crêches. Lip-honouring peace, by their indignant whispers Others they desecrate, their own insure, in their smug vespers. At mattins for their own sins pray to be forgiven, Revelling in others while walking home from heaven. Martrylike suffer for transgressions of the parish, Or say they do, particularly the most garish. But humbly at their bedside never hope that Jesus has destroyed Others' misfortunes wholly, lest themselves be unemployed. Such and so balsting are their faded Joys Which Time, nor Sickness, never quite destroys. Balder and balder every haircut Cutting a caper as lewd as he dare cut, Quasiphilosophically Capricorn carouses Ill at ease in such respectable houses, The disinherited soul of an atrabilious Semi self-deprecating paterfamilias. With many eyeglitters at women's legs in stockings And at the schoolboys' furtive corybantic eyecockings, His Bacchanalian belly he wobbles like a sack with metaphysical justification as Dionysiac, And ungenteel jokes undoubtedly due to his strabismus Distorting even the quaint festivities of Christmas. Remembering in the artificial afternoon Old days when Pan his saxophonic tune Under the ilex played, and how the figwood image Nimbly swayed in the nights of lustful scrimmage, And how in pleased surprise he uttered several Eurekas At finding the gross fungus Ithyphallus Impudicus. With him his father's hair his father's scalp reveals Commensurate, with scratching too much during silent meals, With virgin's blood the holly on the wall Drips. As from Druid branches fail to fall Light, intense pearl juices from alabaster fitting, The proper tight-drawn hostess cuts unwitting Symbols of fertility from Christmas cake. All jollity Is fastened down. Only innocent frivolity Saturnalia is allowed in houses of good quality. Tiddledywog. Meh, meh. The door bursts open wide The Sunday china stands up horrified.Tiddledywog. Meh, meh. All he has ever remembered Bulges out like a plaster panel badly distempered. Tiddledywog. Meh, membrum caprinum erexit: Culpabat, alia aliam, quia ipsa conspexit. Tiddledywog. Tiddledywog. Tiddledywog. First he puts under the mat Persian cat and Pekinese dog. Then the tables' and chairbacks' torselling Smashes, and piles on potsherds of Worcester porcelain. Tiddledywog. Tiddledywog. Forefeet dangling like clappers Dancing about he grips the frightened flapper's Flaxen coils, throws to the ground and violates her. Which done she becomes he: he hates her, And turning on the boy, knocks his eyes out, Strips him, and using sinewy tail as a knout Flogs the boy till he eddies and faints. And the mother faints, Whom Capricorn props up upon the chintz And bathing her forehead with cold milk and tea Reverses coldness that used to be. But when she recovers, recovers himself and batters The woman to death. This seems to mend matters. Next pausing somewhat incommoded by his toils, The carpets, cushions, colour schemes he soils. Last in fierce memory of dislocate desire The house itself he dislocates with fire. Scatters the redhot imitation coals Over this mortuary of human souls. The imitation furniture goes up in smoke And well fired china serves as admirable coke. Like wood distilled that dribbles clammily Oozes the ectoplasm of his burning family. Various vermicular disseminations***
Thank you for your time, Mr. Patterson. I understand you were rather close to Mr. Joplin.
 
Yes, you could say that. Knocked around together for years. But I am curious . . . what is it got you so bent on knowing Joplin's story?
 Well sir, his tunes . . . they have given me great comfort in times of need. They saved me in times voracious grief. They help me remember who I am. Where I’m from. Who I was.
 
Yes. The music will do that—take pain and pour it someplace else for a while.
 I believe that his story is higher . . . deeper than the sound of his music. If people knew the sheer will that was put into each note, they might know better how those tunes, that music, let this country talk itself through its own ugliness. I want to uncover the details of his process. I’ve been talking to the people who knew him most intimately, the ones best able to carry his memory forward. So here I am, putting his story together so I can better know . . . ours. I’m hoping you will help me, sir.
 
I see. (Laughs)
     You got high expectations, you know that? You don’t always get the story you want. It don’t always show the way to where you think you’re going to. And then too, it don’t change nothing if it’s the past. And ain’t nothing sound more like the past these days than some old ragtime tunes. Some things you just can’t get back.
 I’m here for the story as it happened. That’s all I need, Mr. Patterson.
 
Well. You seem to know a thing or two about loss. How the world don’t slow itself one step. Whole world seems sold on racing away from whatever it’s ever been. Hooked on leaving its past behind without a trace. Especially after war.
 That’s true, sir.
 
I see that you’ve seen your share.
 I have, sir. With the 369th.
 
Took a chunk out of you, huh?
 Yes sir. Belleau Wood.
 
Damn. You ain’t that one that won the Croix de Guerre, are you?
 No, sir. Just one that got a bit . . . rearranged.
 
Well, then. Let me pour us a toast . . . Tell me. What story you want to hear? What you need to know?
 I want to know about his unpublished work. You helped Mr. Joplin write his final scores?
 
Well, I was with him. I was in that room with him for days—weeks. He was pressing up on them keys like he was trying to look into a mirror and find his own face. Blood gone almost all the way bad by then.
 Syphilis?
 
Yeah. That bad blooded dog. It bit him up and spat him out—left nothing but dry bones and a crop of scattered nerves—just enough for him to try and stutter out some last scraps of sound. It was rough, boy. Rough.
 Did he get much done?
 
Well, in a seeming sort of way. Problem was, he couldn’t hardly start one rag before he would get up and go to the next. Was all broiled up in each one—start one sounding like morning, get halfway through, and end up switching to some chords that left a midnight taste in your mouth. Start another that blew through your bones like a winter frost, then he’d take a break and come back burning up them keys like August in a cotton field.
 
Did he finish any of those compositions?
 
Can’t tell you. Might have—but most of what he did finish he ended up callin child’s play. But they weren’t any child’s play, I’ll tell you that. Not any child I ever met. I know ’cause I heard him play it all together one time, just before he lit that match.
 
You mean that he played the whole thing at once? As one piece?
 
The whole thing. Took all them raggedy pieces and tied ’em all together with a loose string of phrase all syncopated up like a gold pocket watch. A dozen dozen little song parts ticking away, all coiled up spitting and spinning. Times falling away and then coming together at the last minute . . . goodness.
 Did it have a name?
 
Can’t say it did. Only saw him play it that one night. And everything he was working on was changing titles all the time, anyway. One hour it’d be the If Rag, then turn around and it’d be Lost Boy. Next hour it’d be the Magnetic Rag. Remember Me. Tremble Hand. Hallelujah. Bad Blood. Palms Down. Syncopated Glories. Morning Burl. Seem like they was all getting born up at once—everything he’d had me writing down for all those days and nights. I couldn’t rightly say that all of it was nice sounding. But some of it stuck to me so hard until I could never shake it off. Or maybe it was the way he was playing it—like he was staring down a well. And then sometimes he’d just stop and look at his palms, like he’d brung up a last drink of water. Then he’d just splash it all over that piano.
     But I can still hear parts of it in my head. (Plays)
     That was some good stuff right there. ’Cept he’d played it all stiffed up, bar by bar, most the time.
Till that one last night.
 Were you there that night?
 
I was there. Well, naw I wasn’t there. I was supposed to be. See, he had just played that thing. Had played it all out, till there wasn’t no more. He was sweating and heaving at the end like he’d been running for everything he’d ever lost. I remember once he looked up like he’d found some secret in the music, and then he did something he’d rarely do—he sang a little with the tune, like I’m in the wind,  baby. I’m in the wind, darling. He was just twirling them keys all around, you know. Just twinkling up those high notes with big bashes of bass. Then too, I remember there was this one part in the music where he sounded like he’d wandered somewhere deep in the notes and couldn’t find a way back. Well, he found his way back alright. But he just wasn’t the same no more.
 What happened? How was he different?
 
Well, let me see . . . You ever have someone seem all never-beaten all their life, so never-beaten till it’s like they was never weak? So strong till the day you come to know how weak they are—that’s when you see how you never knew their strength? Well, I had been knowing him for days, weeks, years. All the time knowing ’bout his strength—knowing he would be hitting those keys to the end, even when he was out of it, he’d walk out with his head up. He’d seen worse. Lot worse.
     See, sometimes he’d be out on the road, playing his set—everything that had got his name on it, his bread and butter. He’d be up there playin it all grand and professor-like, kinda stilted up and slowed down so that the audience could hear every note shimmering in its own museum. He’d love each rag like it was the children he never got to see grow up—he’d be keepin them all orderly and polite, straining up their voices—not so much as they’d break, but enough to hear them bend up a little into hope, no matter how sad they might be. But never rushin nowhere. Folks was all okay with that back when he first started playin that Maple Leaf and such.
     But it changed. He thought putting those pieces on paper would help hold them the way he heard them—make them stay proper and well behaved.
 I imagine he was quite eager to get his work published in order to get compensated.
 
Yeah, he was glad to see it out in the world. See, he wanted to leave his sound behind him . . . but see, it didn’t work out quite exactly like that. Once those rags were on paper, every ten-fingered bowler-wearing stud would put his hands all over those tunes. Walk them slow at first, till they learned all their ins and outs. They was polite with them tunes, till they figured out how to roll ’em out a little faster, and then make ’em strut and swagger more with each stride. Next thing you know, they was cakewalking them rags up and down that keyboard like a pimp in the tenderloin. Their fingers would work ’em more faster, more prettier than they was supposed to be—all slicked up and leaned back and sideways steppin—hustled up and tricked out like something illegal, ill tempered and ill-begotten gained.
     And started to be like every time he went to a new town, there’d be some light-fingered hustler out to bootstrap himself up, using Scott like a ladder. Come up onstage after Scott all friendly, then play his pieces all to pieces. I mean snapping those rags with a shoeshine boy’s spit and polish, trying to make the best tip of the week by showing the master how to work his own business. He’d say in his polite little professor tone, “Very nice, but too fast, friend!” and they’d just laugh. He would laugh with them a little through his frown, too—because what else could he do?
     And what’s make it worse is that Scott couldn’t keep up with ’em. That ol’ dog syphilis had him by the throat, and had gnawed up almost everything he could do with his hands . . . and every year it got worse, till he would come into town and some folks would think he must’ve been a faker, askin how could the great rag man be all dusted up and unpolished like that? This be Scott Joplin? This?
     But he never stopped, brother. Never stopped. Would always shake it off, even though you know he’d been shook. Always had a plan—an opera, a show . . . 
 Like Treemonisha, right? Isn’t that what kept him going?
 
Yeah, trying to get that opera up and runnin kept him going for a long time. Years, maybe. But everybody got limits. And that night, he knew he’d just . . . run out of time. He’d played that patchwork blanket of rags for hours and hours that night, all up and down the fingerboard till the air was about beat out the room. And he was breathless. When he looked up you could see there weren’t that many breaths left for him here on this earth, and when I saw his face . . . boy, I just had to ...
     I had to walk away for a while. I went out that door. Got the night air. Cleaned myself off with wall beneath the streetlights.
 So . . . you left the building ...
 
Yeah. Only left about twenty minutes or so, walking round the block. Came back and there was a glowing off the roof of the building. Ran up all them stairs, thinking the building was on fire, maybe one of them johns had dropped a cigar on the roof. Got there to see him standing next to this big old metal trash can, all blazed up with his songs. He must’ve put some kerosene on them ’cause they was blazed up pretty high and hot—I could feel the heat off those rags—damn, all them beautiful rags—could feel the heat from ten feet away. And I could see Scott on the other side. His face all lit up, his hands trembling and holding one last stash of scribbled up music.
     You can’t stop something you know is gonna happen anyway. And then, you still gotta try. And I did. I tried to fix my mouth to talk at him, talk him down from all that mischief the sickness had put up in his brain. But what could I say? All the things you would say in the same situation. Don’t do it, Scott—your voice on paper, your work, think of your bloodline of sound all burning up, man . . . Who gone show them, man? People need to know . . . 
     You know what he said?
 What did he say?
 
It was almost like he knew it was coming. This giant hand of wind came right over us from the river. And he threw them rags all up in the air and into the palm of that hand, and it made a fist and smeared his music all over New York. All them notes all scattered over Manhattan like so many raindrops. All them notes burning up in smoke.
     What’d he say? It’s all in the wind, Sam. It’s all in the wind.

***
Our Box Henry hid    away. John Berryman’s Ol’ Henry sulked. I see his point—he was trying to put one over. It was that he thought that we thought he could do it that breaks our Henry out this-a-way. So, here he will come out and talk.   All the world like a fool-bent lover once did see from Ol’ Henry’s side. Here comes a departure: hereafter, something falls out. Now, it might go fraught. Let us see how Box Henry, pried open for all to see, survives.   What he has now to say is a long wonder the world can bear and see. Once, with his black-face worn, John was glad all at the top. And he sang. Here, in this land where some strong be, let Box Henry grow in every head.                            From Dream Song 1
***
When I got old enough I asked my mother, to her surprise, to tell me what she did with my eyes. She balked and stalled, sounding unsure for the first time I could remember. It was the tender way she held my face and kissed where tears should have rolled that told me I’d asked of her the almost impossible— to recount my blinding tale, to tell what became of the rest of me. She took me by the hand and led me to a small sapling that stood not much taller than me. I could smell the green marrow of its promise reaching free of the soil like a song from Earth’s royal, dirty mouth. Then Mother told me how she, newly freed, had prayed like a slave through the night when the surgeon took my eyes to save my fevered life, then got off her knees come morning to take the severed parts of me for burial—right there beneath that small tree. They fed the roots, climbed through its leaves to soak in sunlight . . . and so, she told me, I can see.   When the wind rustles up and cools me down, when the earth shakes with footsteps and when the sound of birdcalls stirs forests like the black and white bustling ’neath my fingertips I am of the light and shade of my tree. Now, ask me how tall that tree of mine has grown to be after all this time— it touches a place between heaven and here. And I shudder when I hear the earth’s wind in my bones through the bones of that boxed-up swarm of wood, bird and bee: I let it loose . . . and beyond me.  
***
 
D always felt, somehow or other, double. He was an upright line, but then again, he was a curve. When he looked in the mirror straight on, he saw the dapper features of the diplomat he was. But sideways, if he took off his horn-rimmed glasses, he imagined he could be taken for a rather distinguished Dame. He always saw both sides to everything.
     Would he ever find his dæmon—the divine spirit within? Did he really have one spirit? D seemed to be singing a duet with himself.
     Seeing both sides made him a champion procrastinator. D dilly-dallied. Waited till the last minute to decide anything. At every posting, he drove the staff crazy. But that was diplomacy.
     Now dusk dropped on the gated embassy grounds. D flipped on his desk lamp, and the pool of light shut out the trees, looming and dissolving. D drew the drapes, deaf to the delicate drone of insect wings. He returned to his desk, trying to distract himself from a strange little pain that had come to him all his life, like a recurrent dream. (Except, he had to confess, he never dreamed.) The pain was a distinct tiny stab in a spot, well, what would you call that? D called it down there.
     For years, since he was a little d, he considered all the options about this strange pain. It was nothing, really. He went long times between feeling it. Maybe it was too slight to worry about, but then again . . . At last D decided to see a doctor. As a matter of fact, he saw a number.
     “Tell me your dreams,” the first doctor said.
     “Don't bother to ask me, I never dream,” D said.
     “In dreams begin responsibilities,” the doctor quoted.
     D demanded a referral.
     “I've got a very specific pain,” he said to the next doctor. He pointed to, well, down there.
      “Your testicle,” the physician said. Which required a test. Several. And more.
      Finally the second doctor read all the results and announced, “Aha, a dermoid cyst.” What? Inside the cyst were hair follicles and an eye-type thing with eyelashes and a tooth.
     “Do you think I was a twin?” D wondered with a weird kind of delight as he examined the x-ray.
     Well, the doctor wouldn’t go that far. These dermoid cysts were usually removed in childhood. No reason, however, to remove it now. D wouldn’t dream of having it removed! It explained everything! That slightly creepy darling little creature in there must have been a twin, someone D had grown around as she dissolved. D was convinced it was a twin sister.
     And D had absorbed her. Of course he wanted to keep her with him.
     That very day, he had his first dream.
     Exhausted after his discovery, he had returned to the embassy in the late afternoon. Unable to face his office, he diverted his steps from the front walk toward the deserted path on the grounds where no one ever seemed to stroll. He walked deeper into the woods. The path sloped into a shaded dimple in the earth.
     It was dusk in the dell.
     D heard the drone of insect wings. In the mottled light a dragonfly dove straight down. Up curved a damselfly.
     Impulsively D lay down in the leaves in his three-piece suit and curled up like a praying divine, two hands under his chin. He felt himself melting a little. All the old bedevilments dispersed into a delicate dampness. The world softened from darkling to darling . . . 
 
. . . A stately antlered stag appeared in the distance and slowly, with a calm command, walked closer until D could see that he wore a diamond necklace around his neck. The stag slowly bowed his head, doffed his entire rack of antlers, and raised his head up again, looking directly at D.     Now the deer was a doe! The doe blinked her eyes at D, as if waking. Then she donned the antlers, and turned and walked away . . .
 
D woke up ravenously hungry—and overjoyed.
     He dusted himself off and drove straight to dinner. As he stared out the restaurant window, eating his dumplings, he wondered if responsibilities really do begin in dreams.
     Maybe dreams are responsible to us, he thought.
     He felt his sister inside him. She was the reason he was a debonair man, a man who understood that everything has two sides: inner/outer, yes/no. D thought both in lines as sharp as the creases in trousers, and in curves like the swirls of a skirt.     What do I really know? he asked himself. Only that he had woken strangely endeared to himself—and satisfied. Now he understood the necessity of delay. To wait, and then to discover. Never to have only one answer.
     The napkin at the restaurant had come rolled inside a little sparkly ring. “Add this to my bill,” he said to the waiter. And pocketed the little diadem as a reminder of the dyad he was. 
 
***
M loved the little house she shared with her mum, its magnolias and mansard roof. Inside, the smell of molasses and ginger had sunk into the timbers. Water mumbled from a hand pump, not a faucet tap. Music murmured, not from a radio, but from a soft piano. All was washed to softness—the sheets, the table linens. Even the gold rims on the old dishes were brushed down to a blur.
     M had been a surprise late baby, and her mother was almost the age of a grandmother. There were only the two of them—plus Maugie, their cat.
     M grew up thinking she understood her mum. But in fact she only understood her in daylight. The night world was where mum paced with her mountains of money worries. Down the hall M blissfully slept, and down in the basement Maugie moused, bringing her prizes up to the landing so M and Mum could find them first thing in the morning.
     And in the morning light Mum’s money misery vanished. She never spoke of it. But when Mum got sick, her worries magnified. Her illness brought the night world to daylight, though she still managed to hide it from her daughter. Mum could no longer hope for a miracle. Unbeknownst to M, just before Mum died, the ancient lady up and took misfortune into her own misguided hands. She sold their home to the neighbors who had always coveted it.
     Why didn’t she tell me? M plagued herself with questions all through the small funeral—she and her mum were the last of their line—and said to her distant cousins and her friends: She never ever mentioned money! Lawyers, real estate agents, and the neighbors of course were summoned. But the deal was done. Though M harbored murder in her heart for those greedy neighbors, she couldn’t get the house back.
     It’s all MY fault—I should have known, M moaned.
     It took a long time for her to settle these affairs. She’d taken a leave from her job at the museum, but eventually she had to go back to work. She and Maugie went to the only place M could afford to buy, a small but gleaming condominium. How could she transfer doilies and dusty velvet couches with broken legs into this glare? What was home any more? She had an iron bedstead, not a sleek futon. Of course Maugie kept finding her way back to the old homestead, and M had to keep quashing the mayhem in her heart as she retrieved the crafty little animal from that basement now full of the neighbor’s traps instead of mice.
     Up in the condo, M’s dreams began. Each night she dreamed of a ruined house. Mornings she woke to a smell like something left in an oven too long, a whiff of burnt molasses. Sometimes in a dream a window without a wall fell to the ground in mockery. Night after night in her sleep M shouldered mountains of blame. But then came morning.
     All she could do was embrace the day. With her long shapely arms, she put on her makeup, donned her mackintosh, and struck out for the museum, determined to muddle through.
     “It’s not my fault, I know,” she said to McM, the man who occupied the next desk. “I just miss my home.” He offered her a meatloaf sandwich. She said, “I never knew my mum, after all.” M’s dreams went on mortgaging her nights. When she startled awake, there was only Maugie at the foot of the iron bedstead squeaking an unsatisfactory plastic rodent, and a monstrous stink of burnt molasses and cat pee.
     M decided to bake. Using her mother’s measuring cups, she chased the aftermaths of the dreams away by spicing the smells. With cinnamon, with allspice, with vanilla and cardamom, she made muffins, mousse, and meringues in the open-concept kitchen. She used all her mother’s bowls, and all her mother’s spoons, to expunge the smells—and she almost did.
     Meanwhile, Maugie knew whenever workmen propped open a staircase door. The cat would slip into the hall, then escape down the stairwell through the service door. And M would get a call at the museum from the mingy mean-spirited neighbors.
     “And what am I going to do with Maugie?” M moaned to McM.
     “Your cat is lonely,” he said. “Does she have service potential?”
     Maugie would be tested. McM agreed to help.
      The minute McM walked into the combo of gleam and old wood and velvet and iron, the marvelous smells wrapped around him. “You’ve been baking,” he murmured approvingly, “in your farmhouse in the sky.” But M was busy wrangling Maugie into the carrier.
     Shortly the cat was deposited on the welcoming laps of ancient ladies in wheelchairs. That champion purr eased the ladies’ hearts. Maugie aced the test. Seeing the ladies, something in M eased, too.
     “My mother is a mystery I may never solve,” she said to McM on one of their lunchtime trips to the old ladies. Maugie now went willingly into her carrier.
     And so the bright weekday activities wore down the mountains of dreams. Blame became a molehill. M’s nightmares became so predictable they were almost friendly. Metamorphosis set in. McM lingered when he held M’s coat, and she lingered as he slipped it on. Their hands met when they put the cat carrier into the car. But these were the gestures of daylight.
     Thinking she was ready to brave the evening light, M had made the mistake of inviting McM for Saturday dinner. When the day came, she lay in bed with a fever, vacuuming was abandoned, her mahogany hair unwashed. Though the mushroom soup gurgled on the stove and the mousse slept in the fridge, the main course had never been started. She left a message canceling.
     McM arrived anyway with merlot and magnolias. He merged into M’s mess. It smelled of cough drops and kitty litter and dust and the fragrance of a woman in a slept-in nightgown. She slid beneath layers of consciousness like the layers of the blankets he straightened for her. And then balancing two hot toddies, fully clothed, he climbed into the bed. Maugie obliged him with a space.
     M was too weak to protest. She woke and drank and woke and slept. At midnight M sat up and slurped the mushroom soup held by McM. Magnificent . . . 
     And then she sank. That night of course she dreamed of a house, but this house was merely old, not ruined. It was the homestead, magnolias laden, sheet music still in the piano bench. When she woke, she smelled McM, still fully clothed at her side, his glasses on the floor, batted about by Maugie. Nothing smelled burnt. Unlike her mother, M didn’t believe in miracles. She believed in muddling through. Slowly something had risen in her, like those moons you sometimes see in an afternoon sky, night inside the persistence of day. M sat up in bed, hugging her knees, looking at McM sprawled beside her. The house at last is inside me, she thought. I’ve finally moved. 
 
***
      NO was a violin, NOT a viola, and NEVER a cello. They were noble instruments, but highly nonconformist. Prickly in personality, if sexy. Wayward. Always went in their own direction. Made odd choices. Loved the difficult. Naysayed the popular. Collectively unified in a single reaction to the mainstream: negative.
      When they first chanced to come together, they doubted they would ever meld.
      But the minute they began to make music, they discovered a numinous core to their triangle. They couldn’t see this core, smell it, or touch it—and neither could their slender audience (thirty people on folding chairs in a church). But all felt it was a natural union of sound, nimble and sublime.
     That night they became the Negativo Trio.
     Retiring to nestle in the velvet warmth of their cases, they whispered to each other, debriefing and musing in the first of many nightly pajama parties. This very first evening they discovered that what they wanted above all were two things. One was to play their music with the very nacre of its nature, and the other was fame.
     Night after night they played. Increased their bookings. Recorded. And were downloaded. They raised money to pay off the debt of their obscure choices. On stage they each shone with the patina of centuries: maple, spruce, and willow with an elegant varnish of gum arabic, honey, and the whites of eggs.
     But they weren’t famous, even though they played a nocturne as if every note were a black pearl.
     Yet NO, NOT and NEVER did everything everyone advised them to be famous: they networked, they nodded nicely to publicists, they flashed their Negativo news on social media. But the fact was, the trio wasn’t for everybody.
     “Do you think it’s our name?” NOT the Viola asked. “Would we be more famous as the Nightingale Trio?”
     “Nope,” said NEVER the Cello. “Negativo has our brio.” And NEVER was right. The three of them played with nerve. The knottier the piece, the better. They made their audiences reach.
     “We should be sexier,” NO the Violin said. “Naughtier. It’s our propensity for the minor key; we should lighten it up.” But when they played in the minor key, their audiences felt they had arrived at the navel of the universe. The instruments could never give up the minor.
     Would the Negativos ever learn what the people in the seats knew? The trio wasn’t famous because, well, they kind of unnerved people. You had to have nettle to take them on.
     Though they certainly wouldn’t have said no to notoriety, eventually they had to admit that they could not surrender their quirks.
     “We will never be famous,” NEVER said one night after they had nestled in their cases for their midnight debriefing.
     “I’m nauseous,” said NO extravagantly.
     “And neglected,” said NOT excessively.
     “Never,” said NEVER decisively.
     They would never fill the biggest halls. Or be the first name on the tips of tongues. And with the inverted logic of misplaced dreams, even though they had toured, had notched up review, and had triumphs and fans, and websites and bloggers, and a body of criticism devoted to them, they felt they had reached their nadir.
     The next morning they couldn’t seem to get up. They lay immobile, as if their velvet-lined cases were coffins.
      A netherworldly silence descended.
      The dust of despair drifted through the crack between the case tops and bottoms onto these living dead.
     Time dragged like a dirty hem.
     Naught into Nil.
     Desolation into Dormancy.
     Dormancy into . . .
                                 . . . Rest.
     Rest into Snoozing.
     Snoozing into Sleep.
     Sleep into Healing.
     The nostrum of sleep lasted until the pinkish light that heralds spring.
     A noisy nuthatch drilled for insects in a nearby tree. It was a forest sound, yodel-y and ebullient. It awoke the maple and spruce and willow of the Negativo’s constitutions. Their bodies couldn’t help responding to the vernal signal given when spring utters its only word: Nevertheless. 
     If not fame, nevertheless music.
     “Numbskull nuthatch!” NEVER growled.
     “Ninny nuthatch,” NO yawned.
     “Bumptious bird,” NOT shifted, inadvertently jostling the snap to the dusty case. It sprang open. NO unclicked and climbed out, too. And NEVER heaved the lid.
      They played immediately of course, trying a violin piece by the underrated Nardini. Most thought him a lightweight, but the Negativos gave it their signature interpretation of naked necessity.
     “Oh it was NOTHING,” they began to say to one another as they did musical favors for themselves, producing scores of synchronicities and the occasional juicy nihilistic dissonance. They buoyed on their notes, as if a midnight Pacific of calm, rich, dark negatives were effused with luminescence.
      How relieved their listeners were to have them back. Again their audiences were made aware of the noses between their ears. That slight, brief piquancy in the nostrils was the smell of earthly harmony. It came from within the airy column that united the instruments, the nucleus of their refusal to suit. Such accord, though it is as rare as ease, seems like nothing.
     And so the Negativo Trio was known as a trio’s trio.
     Not famous, but known.
     Contrary to the vicissitudes of fame, ease is the path of the known, smooth as the satin of the instruments’ finish. To be recognized, yet not to suffer the disadvantages of fame, is a state so ideal it is the pinnacle of a career. NO, NOT and NEVER had at last woken up to that.
 
***
The guardian angel sits in the tree above the black lip of street the man walks down. He calls the man Cargo. The angel sees a pinewood box in place of the man, and the street he walks is a boat, the hull like a coal crater. Somewhere in the real world there is such a boat and box. The angels call these overlays dreams, and believe they crop up because angels can’t sleep but want to —  space falls apart when you have unlimited time.    •  The cargo is rattling in the boat. Maybe it’s just the waves, maybe it’s rats. What’s the difference? Either way: it’s the box. The angel sends the man a happy vision from his past — the time he fed birthday cake to his goldfish after an unsuccessful party. The angel thinks he’s applying lemon oil to the creaky, wounded wood of the box. He knows it’s palliative, but it’s beautiful.   •  The man reaches the end of the street. He’s a sick man and he starts to ponder death as he often does these days: All of death is right here — the gods, the dark, a moon. Where was I expecting death to take me if everywhere it is is on earth? At life’s close, you’re like the child whose parents step out for a drive —  everyone else out on a trip, but the child remains in the familiar bed, feeling old lumps like new in the mattress — the lights off —  not sleeping, for who can sleep with the promise of a world beyond the door?   •  That night the child dreams he’s inside the box. It’s burning hot, the heat coming from bugs and worms raping and devouring one another. He starts the hard work of the imagination, learning to minister to the new dream. Perhaps all that’s needed is a little rain —  for everyone to drink and have a bath. Outside: a car humming, somewhere, his mother’s singing.
***
After the cocoon I was in a human body instead of a butterfly’s. All along my back there was great pain — I groped to my feet where I felt wings behind me, trying to tilt me back. They succeeded in doing so after a day of exertion. I called that time, overwhelmed with the ghosts of my wings, sleep. My thoughts remained those of a caterpillar —  I took pleasure in climbing trees. I snuck food into all my pains. My mouth produced language which I attempted to spin over myself and rip through happier and healthier. I’d do this every few minutes. I’d think to myselfWhat made me such a failure? It’s all a little touchingly pathetic. To live like this, a grown creature telling ghost stories, staring at pictures, paralyzed for hours. And even over dinner or in bed —  still hearing the stories, seeing the pictures —  an undertow sucking me back into myself. I’m told to set myself goals. But my mind doesn’t work that way. I, instead, have wishes for myself. Wishes aren’t afraid to take on their own color and life —  like a boy who takes a razor from a high cabinet puffs out his cheeks and strips them bloody.
***
the first trees were felled and sailed in, wrecked, then slept an age in the northern sun, blackening to iron                    were found by horsemen leading their horses and raised as cloud’s axles, rafters of night, a god’s gates      were passed through, seen from miles off, rolled the sun and moon along their lintels, rooted, put out leaves                     for a second time creaked, tasted the rain, held the wind to their hearts while the horsemen streamed like their horses’ manes into the dark, their fires black smudge in the subsoil, their bridles of gold underground      lived long, grew great                   were a second time felled, dressed                   were sharpened to stakes and raised as a fort by farmers who’d followed their ploughs to the treeline for fuel to bake the pots their ashes were buried in with a scattering of grain like stars                 each small clay heaven still hangs in the earth      were overgrown, steered clear of      called dragon’s ribs                    devil’s cot                 were nested among, rotted down beside      harbored foxglove, eggshell owl pellet, primrose, honeycomb      were glazed, split                   put out buds of malachite, blossoms of salt, grew again, put out small translucent fruits named by the women who prized them teardrops, ice apples, clarities       were offered bread, dolls of woven grass, plaits of hair, coins with the obverse ground smooth, beads of  turquoise     twisted, straightened, filled with rooks, held again the wind to their hearts, creaked, scraped off the sunlight’s scales with their leaves, were a grove, grew manes of lichen, were murmured under, gave counsel on still nights of open doorways the dead came through on horseback or shouldering flails or bearing chimes of ice apples                       gave shelter      were felled for it, their roots ripped up by a legion’s engineers and left like brainstems rucked on the earth      were timber but the pit saws snarled in their rings of iron      broke teeth on the flints that welted their sapwood      were good for nothing, stacked, fired, marched away from, sucked up the flames, hissed, smoked, glowed blood- black, were tempered, twice- forged                     bided on site as battle-stain, in story as Head Wood      lay half-buried, grown over, still hot                   were stumbled upon by navigators, hit with hammers and rang until they were made lock gates to slam shut on the slow wet      grew green, slime- faced, knew runoff, weird particulates, held fast against drizzle’s tonnage, the nudge and bonk of a bloater        were left stinking when the water died      stood strange in currents of deep grass, open wide      flexed, hungered once more for the light, bulged, branched, rived out of their lacquer, unfurled leaves of oilskin, shook down clots of blossom            lived long, grew great      weren’t felled but walled in, roofed over, giving span to a farmhouse, hanging a hall from their outstretch, bracing floor after floor on their inosculating joists, which sang to a barefoot tread and were called home of shadows             heart of the wind     Lamanby
***
It considers those men that ambled & Flushed their swords & cut off the neck Of the blue horses & scraped off death Dust from the carcass — rape of women Tresses in boilers — the tin-colored animals On the viridian grasses in particular the Howler Monkey let the word shoot up To the spheres — later we charged our Blood with these accounts we hid the arms Unforgiving texts & designs sewn into Our tiny alabaster lockets. We visited The last ridge where Victor Jara Denounced the paramilitary — from La Obrera in the heights of  Tijuana we Sketched the reddish moon & scratched Poems those things that could carry The letters we hauled on our backs. We were separated from something we Could not describe yet we were in The totality in the long winding turquoise That broke us & put us back together Again. What was that totality? It could Not be written — Green moon, green blood —  We wrote. We marched to the ends of Lacanjá Chansayab & the heights Of El Colorín Central México. We were too Late — the waters in which people bathed Were cloudy & malignant — bellies Bloated children leaned on the twig House women stood up some sat cross- Legged under the fire rays of noon —  We knew they knew the rubble land Was not theirs or ours it was stuffed into The cigarette packs of the Ladino Hacendados who kicked up their short Boots in the City of Bones below. With our faces in new faces we rolled Back to LA. Do you change it? Do you Leave it the same? Words — what are they? A new cognition was required — then With the ecstasy of the unleashed Other things pulled us apart. Other things Reassembled us. Now we are here.
***
I bring you a hummingbird’s nest, woven from seed-down, thistle head, bound with lichen and spidersilk, shaped by a mother who presses her breast against the cup, uses her rump, chin, the curve of her wing, who stomps her claws on the base to check it’s windproof under this leaf porch. The male gone, she works alone, hurrying back and forth thirty times an hour, before the eggs come. She lays them in a home small as a nutshell, the rim turned in, the sides pliant so they’ll stretch as the chicks grow. Little mother, I’ve read your file filled with letters to the mairie, begging for a place where we could live together. I know now how hard you fought the powers, like a jeweled dart stabbing at their door, before you fell prey to the jungle mantis. Instead of flowers, I leave you this nest on your grave, in case you make it from your migration — only a wisp of feathers, no flesh left on your bones.
***
I crawl back       he unpacks his tools oils the wooden handles        rinses the metal fragrant       his thighs fragrant his sneer koi & eternity inked on his skin          an ecstatic blue a bewildered green some wounds are ovals some wounds are opals the ears of a white wolf pivot        toward the moon I flee now & then         alone in the desert for months a nomad in a kimono of pressed-together dust beautiful his throat his words         even more beautiful “it’s my turn to ask for a bit more from you” he likes it when I bleed         strangers once gently he hammers gold into a sentence       gently the sentence enters me
***
All zodiac all  radar your voice I carried it across the Atlantic to Barcelona I photographed cathedrals cacti mosaic salamanders I even photo- graphed my lust always your voice skimming a woman’s skin mattress springs so noisy so birdlike you filled her room with cages camera bright in my pocket map unfolding in my mind I explored a park leaves notched & enormous graffitied boulders then three men    tall & clean closed in they broke open my body with their fists insufferable your red wool cap insufferable the way you walked away from me come back please the buttons on your jacket are finches I wanted to yell as you vanished into a hotel to drink with your friends there was nothing more you could do after my attackers left before I got up I touched my face almost tenderly
***
He never saw a violin. But he saw a lifetime of violence. This is not to presume That if he had simply seen A violin he would have seen Less violence. Or that living among Violins, as though they were Boulangeries or toppling stacks Of other glazed goods like young adult Fiction, would have made the violence Less crack and more cocaine, Less of course and more why god oh why. More of one thing Doesn’t rhyme with one thing. A swill of stars doesn’t rhyme With star. A posse of poets doesn’t rhyme With poet. We are all in prison. This is the brutal lesson of the 21st century, Swilled like a sour stone Through the vein of the beast Who watches you while you eat; Our eternal host, the chummed fiddler, The better tomorrow, MMXVI.
***
On a scale of Lustrous to Sockeye, Fishscale to Fire-Dot. Not Ichthyosis: Lichen. Fruiting bodies in a calcareous spot. Goldspeck. Blushing. O the diffuse eruption of dazzling papulæ! Usher the Wild Lichen. Usher spring and the furfuraceous scurf recurs. The Brain-Scaled (the hairline cracked). The Blue-Blistered, the Earth-Wrinkled. Neither Strophulus nor stoppable. Like wildfire rash the crustose rush of successive crops. Tundra Sulphur, circumpolar, the snowy excoriations. So squats the Dog Lichen, the Freckle Pelt. Cobblestoned, chronic, the not contagious.
***
I’m queer for nouns or verbs that end in -ickle, For bouncy trampolines, for trust and bluff. We’re told by those downtown that La Morbid’s dull Renouncing didn’t rustle up enough Bling to dazzle more than a few of them. Turn on a dime, a channel. Those we flip Ring truer than the frilly stratagem Fern bars used to unfurl, and we know zip About karate or brass knucks. To battle The meltdown blues, lay out your Cups and Swords. Don’t doubt the Duke will hop down from the saddle, His belt slung low. Check out the storyboards: Next year he trades his roan for a motorcycle.
***
... and we remarked on how piranhas, in uncounted numbers, are capable of consuming an entire ampersand in such-and-such a time frame. The sun was up, and below, and was somewhere overhead. And I thought....     ... and we shared thick and hearty laughs, and continued into the very dense jungle. And thick. Preceding us on the trailsides were ruins overgrown, boots stuck in mud, and heads of sunken ampersands. Which made sense to us, for....     ... and the rainy seasons came, and went, and came. And day, and further day. And February was unusually warm, and this, in a zone renowned for unusually warm Februaries. We cooled our hands on ampersands, which warmed again when....     ... and you took my hand, and clasped it, tighter than I could stand it, tighter than mud clasping ampersands still. And so I fell, and you held me as I, unstanding, looked up at lianas in trees —  the monkey skyways that    ....     ... and the language we used with each other became thicker. We looked together at some ludicrous, large leaf — larger than us both, and thicker even than several large ampersands, together. We used thick language to describe it, then....     ... and we grew ravenous and set camp. And established a village. Built huts with cots, and plots of land for farms. We grew ampersands there and ate them, and when through with their husks, threw them into our yards, where....     ... and you took me, deeper into jungle, with the wild dogs and boars, and cackling beasts, and beasts that swung in silence. Dangling from the tufts, saliva strands from ampersands obscured us in the roughs. We toweled and traveled and tired and....     ... and the birds became aware of our presence, though we desired to blend in. We made tangible feathers from intangible thoughts, stuck beaks to our mouths using ampersand glue. We sat in our colors, without motion for days, until....     ... and you communed with insensible arrangements: changeable organizations; shapeless distractions; puffs of dimension; ampersands; the dead. I pulled you close and kissed you, but all I could taste was vortex, and sweet guava, and the distances to....     ... and we grew thicker together, for I too could perceive, in the dry expanses, forms of invisible logos made thick — the un-wet language of communicable waves. We washed ourselves in it, but our feet, touching ampersands, touched not the....     ... and you dipped your foot, from the riverbank into the river, where the piranhas began eating. And I sat, looking at my hands. Sat, for there was nothing I could say. On the riverbank, alone. There, with whatever remained. &....
***
As Walter settled in to finish his coffee, he was struck by a phantom, peripheral visage, white as pins in flight, or bunny white, in haze — a visit from “The Agent,” in the nominal parlance of chemical memory, calling from a distant muddied element. Or was it merely the milk he’d spilled in a fatuous fit, hooking out to the Brooklyn back of his cup? All he could abide, he put his face down in the muck, and made off for The Dude’s abode. “These are purple times,” he thought, “when pseudo-pious cliques strike polyester poses while jockeying for pockets. And mocking fatuous Donny? That sweet prince, that palsied, hiccuping flake of bunny fluff?” Not for this aggression would he stand — not for that element. It required satisfaction, and of superior sort to parlance. Oh, but he would have his ear! Though for this spar: lance and blade, tooth and trigger — less to mind, and more, would he abide, in body to this immodest plum-clad receptacle. He popped a Velemint, and rang His Dudeness’s door. “Bolted,” Duder’s hand had struck in ink, “Out of cream. Gone to market. 8pm practice.” His buddy was benumbed: “Dash this dairy! You’ve become fat to us with cordials of coffee and curds. Oh, uncareful beverage! Such fatuous froth and foam will be your undoing!” Yet not undone, but in parlay with his special lady, laid up in zesty enterprise, coital as bunnies, making maudlin moan. The story is ludicrous. Though if one abides that one must “feed one’s monkey,” in manner most gutter-struck, and not with precious prandials, “Brie pour lui. Et pour elle,  emmental,” one can dig El Duderino’s doings. All others are cowards — elements without sentiment, without Johnsons or ethos, foreign and fatuous, with lingonberries on leashes, and marmot marmalades struck onto pancakes. Neither good men nor thorough, poor in parlance and in practice, unable to fix cable or walk on water — though may abide it when seated, in slumber, in summer, with clouds above, as Bunny puffs on polish. The poor woman, helpless as a frail fawn beneath a nude sun. A trophy wife, atrophied, fallen in with the wrong element: known pornographers; sycophants; Aimee Mann. Difficult to abide, and not exactly lightweights, is she herself to blame for her fatuous caprices? Her husband’s lost legs? The Dude’s stained parlor rug — his only tether, the life and memory of it, dimmed when stricken? Oh, the little for which we are compensated. About the size of our abidance, and theirs: some Credence tapes; a can of ashes, released to the  elements; specklike Brandt, crisp and shivering. A yet-to-be-dismantled toe, Bunny’s.
***
All this tall grass has ruined my gold acrylic nails & I know something’s dead just beyond my window. I grew up with rats running my floorboards & know the smell straining from a body once caught in a trap. In the city what little I have of an ass is always out, a simple wind blow from Marilyn Monroe-ing the street. Here, in all this nature, there is nobody but me & my 5 friends for a week & I promised myself I’d be naked but the first day I found a tick clinging to my arm hair for dear life & decided no way I’m exposing my pussy to the elements. My love for nature is like my love for most things: fickle & theoretical. Too many bugs & I want a divorce. Last week, before I was here my uncle drove me from our city to the suburbs & sang “Project Chick” in the car. When we parked he asked me to take off my shoes & there we walked, silent, barefoot circling the lake, trying to not step in goose shit. He walked in front & I trailed behind both our hands clasped behind our backs.    When you were my daughter,     those were the happiest days of my life.     I wish you would come home.***
You asked me last summer: “What is a doily?” Sometimes, at lunch, I walk on the beach. Today I was coatless. A storm cloud threatened, Dark as a spaceship. Should it pour, A sister ship down in the water Would throw up grappling nets to the surface, Rain rise to soak me. Behind a sandbank, Waves touched the shore, no more than a shimmer. Less rare than its cousin, the antimacassar, A doily’s placed between sweet thing and china. Both survive where vicars arrive For tea, are given thin cup and saucer Instead of a mug. If your cake’s so rich That it’s leaking syrup, you’ll need a doily. Held up, its paper’s the filigree Of snowflake, or fingers looked through in fear. The shower holds off. My shoe’s a doily. Without it, where would I be on these shells That crunch underfoot, like contact lenses, As I gingerly walk, on my mermaid way Back to my husband in his human dwelling? Someone is pulling a blue toy trawler Along the horizon to port, so smoothly It looks realistic. Sea’s partly doily. Surfers ride its lace to their downfall, After all, we’re nothing but froth. Like a carpet salesman, the indolent tide Flops a wave over, showing samples: “Madam, This one is durable, has a fringe.” Under Its breath the sea sighs, “Has it come To this? Must everything always end in ... doily?” It must. Broad afternoon. The rain-cloud barges Have passed and here’s a cumulonimbus parade Of imperial busts, the Roman rulers In historical order which, I think, would please you. Their vapor curls and noble foreheads Are lit up in lilac because they’re invading The west. Next come the philosophers and, last of all, The poets. Pulleys draw them delicately on. Here comes Lucretius, then Ovid, then Horace In lines, saying relentlessly, “Doily,” “Doily,” Till stars take over and do the same.
***
i  I didn’t choose the word —  it came pouring out of my throat like the water inside a drowned man. I didn’t even push on my stomach. I just lay there, dead (like he told me) & “I” came out. (I’m sorry, Father. “I” wasn’t my fault.)   ii  (How did “I” feel?) Felt almost alive when I’d get in, like the Trojan horse. I’d sit on the bench (I didn’t look out of the eyeholes so I wouldn’t see the carnage).   iii  (Is “I” speaking another language?) I said, “I” is dangerous. But at the time I couldn’t tell which one of us was speaking.   iv  (Why “I”?) “I” was the closest I could get to the one I loved (who I believe was smothered in her playpen). Perhaps she gave birth to “I” before she died.   v  I deny “I,” & the closer I get, the more “I” keeps receding.   vi  I found “I” in the bulrushes raised by a dirtiness beyond imagination. I loved “I” like a stinky bed. While I hid in a sentence with a bunch of other words.   vii  (What is “I”?) A transmission through space? A dismemberment of the spirit? More like opening the chest & throwing the heart out with the gizzards.   viii  (Translation) Years later “I” came back wanting to be known. Like the unspeakable name of God, I tried my 2 letters, leaving the “O” for breath, like in the Bible, missing.   ix  I am not the “I” in my poems. “I” is the net I try to pull me in with.   x  I try to talk with “I,” but “I” doesn’t trust me. “I” says I am slippery by nature.   xi  I made “I” do what I wasn’t supposed to do, what I didn’t want to do —  defend me, stand as an example, stand in for what I was hiding. I treated “I” as if “I” wasn’t human.   xii  They say that what I write belongs to me, that it is my true experience. They think it validates my endurance. But why pretend? “I” is a kind of terminal survival.   xiii  I didn’t promise “I” anything & in that way “I” is the one I was most true to.
***
There were scruffy local prophets just beyond cannon-range in every hamlet. Door-Hinge Guillem, say, in Lebanon, OH — gets no respect — or Josh the Carpenter, for example, out on a limb in Galilee, RI. Him they tend to snub, until winter cracks the mast off the yacht, & the tub starts to founder petrified in flounder- nets (Ocean’s cold reprimand). Time gets old, echoes grow faint; the statue in the park steps into evening dark, amnesia puts on war-paint. Your icon, buried in the garden sank like a thousand ships into the grass. Those lips still graze my ear, sheep-warden —  whispering forgotten words out of a lichen-book. Words of the sea. Look, their wave-trace in the woods —  a cedar replica. Her milky kingdom was a salt-spray splinter, Noah’s rudder-stump — her shuddering Shaker-wheel spelled freedom.
***
In a room more chicken coop than room, I rent a fan that feels on my face like sound. Low traffic from San Fernando, named for a king who became a city, a valley, a saint. We are meant to repeat his name. Instead I say prickly pear, a cactus which spreads its many-paddled hands into the space around itself. No pears. I call Mom to ask what the latest austerity measures mean. Some ants on the wall make their way from one unseeable point to another; the banks have closed. I tell her to barter; barter what, she says. An acquaintance posts “Tourism: The Best Way to Be an Ally to Greece” as if in each tourist’s pleasure bloomed a charity. Mules clabber down the stone paths loaded with grapes to make next year’s wine, if the tourists come back next year, and we hope they will. I say we, but I’m closer to they. Living temporarily in a neighborhood named for the happy, who were who exactly? I grow a little stiff with, a little lean with, a little faint with, a little worn with seeming. I must need to conquer my mind. The roses dead because of drought because whoever lives here cares enough to let their roses die. I must need to conquer the notion anything needs conquering. Something in me can’t tell what belongs. The ants for whom anything is a street. What sounded like a gate opening was eucalyptus branches dragging themselves along the tin roof. A yellow butterfly that has no interest in me. I have no interest in kings.
***
I saw then the white-eyed man leaning in to see if I was ready yet to go where he has been waiting to take me. I saw then the gnawing sounds my faith has been making and I saw too that the shape it sings in is the color of cast-iron mountains I drove so long to find I forgot I had been looking for them, for the you I once knew and the you that was born waiting for me to find you. I have been twisting and turning across these lifetimes where forgetting me is what you do so you don’t have to look at yourself. I saw that I would drown in a creek carved out of a field our incarnations forged the first path through to those mountains. I invited you to stroll with me there again for the first time, to pause and sprawl in the grass while I read to you the poem you hadn’t known you’d been waiting to hear. I read until you finally slept and all your jagged syntaxes softened into rest. You’re always driving so far from me towards the me I worry, without you, is eternity. I lay there, awake, keeping watch while you snored. I waited, as I always seem to, for you to wake up and come back to me.
***
Chimerical, the rhinoceros egret, its keratin dehorned in South Africa and container-shipped to Vietnam or China where it’s ground by aphrodisiasts and snorted by affluent boneheads, metamorphs into the hippopotamus egret, the elephant, Cape buffalo, zebra, giraffe, the ostrich, and the camel egret, the deep-domed tortoise, and in the Americas the cow heron or cattle egret. Ranging like wildfire over the last century, a migration prodded by the transmutation of forests into ranches, the cattle egret writhes and champs and tilts and plods and darts in cursive at grasshoppers. And where its livestock gets concentrated, decapitated, tenderized, charred, whatever, the Bubulcus ibis or cattleman wader, capitalizing on a field without cattle, reinvents itself as the tractor egret though the unattached bird is emblem enough of the other end of extinction, ignition, when not just its shaggy breeding crest and breast plumage go up in flame but its legs, beak, lores, and irises catch color.
***
The maggot dreams of the ear and the wound, that welcome dark between gauze and knee, cheek and skull, and any open moment in the body that will have it. The child- fly wants a mouth to grow into, a burn to salve, a heart to feed on. It calls for sugar and Job and marrow. The maggot loves St. Lazarus, though he walked away, loves the warm cutbanks of the chest. When the maggot asks for wings, we will answer with painted hands, eyes beneath coins, a promise of graves.
***
Anyone who begins a sentence with, “In all honesty ... ” is about to tell a lie. Anyone who says, “This is how I feel” had better love form more than disclosure. Same for anyone who thinks he thinks well because he had a thought. If  you say, “You’re ugly” to an ugly person — no credit for honesty, which must always be a discovery, an act that qualifies as an achievement. If  you persist you’re just a cruel bastard, a pig without a mirror, somebody who hasn’t examined himself enough. A hesitation hints at an attempt to be honest, suggests a difficulty is present. A good sentence needs a clause or two, interruptions, set off  by commas, evidence of a slowing down, a rethinking. Before I asked my wife to marry me, I told her I’d never be fully honest. No one, she said, had ever said that to her. I was trying to be radically honest, I said, but in fact had another motive. A claim without a “but” in it is, at best, only half  true. In all honesty, I was asking in advance to be forgiven.
***
On the way home, Klansmen handed out pamphlets on the corner. At the convenience store, taxidermied alligator heads framed red red lips, black black skin, white wild white wide eyes, and teeth grinning (gritting). Mammy, Sambo, savages and jockeys shaped cookie jars, figurines, gravy boats, piggy banks, and salt and pepper shakers. I hold evidence in the shape of entrails, two scales stuck to the side of the sink. Bodies decapitated and soaked in milk and butter. Breaded in crumbs. Tender, the results of freeing the little ones. Mount that big one there. I have lived with the reduction of noise and the number of warnings. I have lived under July’s blankets and February’s ill-fitting sleeves. I have lived with the proof of the Susquehanna’s existence, in the shadow of the shadow of the outline of a bubble’s refracted edge.
***
Dogs so long with us we forget that wolves allowed as how they might be tamed and sprang up all over the globe, with all humans, all at once, like a good idea.   So we tamed our own hearts. Leashed them or sent them to camp’s edge. Even the shrinks once agreed, in dreams our dogs are our deepest selves.   Ur Dog, a Siberian, dogged the heels of nomads, then turned south to Egypt to keep Pharaoh safe.  Seemed strange, my mother sighed, when finally we got a hound,. . . a house without a dog.    Her world never knew a yard un-dogged and thus unlocked. Sudden intrusions impossible where yappers yap.   Or maybe she objected to empty armchairs, rooms too quiet without the beat of tail thump or paw thud.  N’de, Ojibwe say, my pet,  which also suggests ode, that spot in the chest, the part you point to when you pray, or say with great feeling—great meaning, meaning dog-love goes that deep.  
***
At a certain point I stopped and asked what poems I could write, which were different from the poems I wanted to write, with the wanting being proof that I couldn’t write those poems, that they were impossible. What I could do was different from what I wanted. To see this was the beginning of work that could be work, not simply pursuit after pursuit that was bound to fail, yearning for qualities that were not mine and could not be mine. Aiming for a muscular logic that could be followed by a reader’s mind like an old stone wall running along a landscape, I got nothing so solid or continuous. The authority I wanted dissolved always into restlessness, into a constant gathering of images whose aggregate seemed like things that had come to settle inside a glove compartment. I had no faith in my flaws, but I had a grudging faith in the particular. There was the actual stone wall, its mongrel irregular blocks harmonized into use, rich and ordinary as a soul. There was the flea that landed on my forearm one night as I sat reading. The black speck of it, then the outsize sting. The flea that is an insect, has no wings, can jump vertically seven inches and horizontally thirteen inches. The flea that looks, through the magnifier, like the villain spaceship from a science-fiction movie, that can live for years in good conditions, and lives by drinking the blood of animals and birds, in a practice that is called, by science, hematophagy.
***
                                                   Miles of them grow in my carry-on and travel with me across continents but the customs officers are suspicious they eye my old suitcase and ask me to open it                                                   Pickles? they ask sniffing deeply prodding a packet or two say Sure ma’am you’ve got no jeera or chilies? (now they’ve learned the Hindi word for cumin so the new trick is to joke with us) And one time                                                   I saw three burly officers question an elderly couple disheveled as I was from 20-plus hours of travel from Kolkata and as disoriented (and yes as usual all the usual “foreign” suspects are sent along to “Agriculture”) and they poked around in their overstuffed bags (where some rice fields appeared but they couldn’t see them of course) and                                                       one officer said Duck? Bombay Duck? It’s a fish?? Dried fish your son wanted? Sorry no fish allowed or birds***
They weighed the human soul — twenty-one grams — a tremor on the air becoming trance, becoming nimbus. No. It is a deadweight, a plummet, drawing down to its harbor beside the heart. It is Breath and Word, they said. No. It is pig-iron and salt. The dying feel its slow lift as riddance, a bar of darkness hoisting against the light.Something shifted under his skin, it puckered, as might a worm going slither-and-tuck close to the nape of his neck, then up past the cheekbone and onto the sill of his eye to gorge on the image trapped there, the last of her, the last lost thing before the sky grew dark and all the windows closed. The dead are given permission to walk among us. They smile dead smiles, they have no need for speech. The familiar goes for nothing. Each evening they hold up to our windows their silent, smiling children. Salt flats of dream of memory of dream ... limitless horizons and out on the utmost rim (can you see?) a house white-on-white abstract except for the room-within-a-room which can’t be seen but can be known, white being one thing in sunlight another under moonlight, not oblivion, not revival, and the soul’s song across that windless landscape, unheard; by night the heart-stopped silence, by day the rising glare. Graves under bramble and a wet light through the trees. A quietness something like stealth or sudden absence; it seemed to gather and disperse. Rat-run, ground for stray dogs, a place where lovers come to be swallowed whole by half-light. You could lie down here on thorn, on stone, and find your match. Wind-driven salt in the crevice of the rock is how memory works: image, invention, regret. It maddens with its ersatz colors, unknowable language, sudden reversals, shoreline, skyline, cityscape, landscape ... There are those who wake with the whole thing fixed at the forefront of their minds: a stage-set, people held in a frozen moment who will break to action soon, one fearful, one laughing, one clawing at her eyes. He was wearing a dead man’s coat: knee-length, snug, the lining rich shot silk in midnight blue. “As I thought,” she said, “a perfect fit. Of course, you look nothing like him, nor do you have that rangy, loose-limbed stride or straightness of back.” One side-pocket was sewn up, in the other, a letter. He threw it away as he left. Music at every turn, music by accident, a voice between the phrases, between the notes, calling, calling, and this not song but touchstone, blind bargain, last chance. Dust-devil, derecho, twister, cyclone, clean sweep, she is locked-off in this and the place is dark the way a pebble is dark at its center ... then her prophecy-in-song, eyes wide open in sleep, his hand across her mouth. What they did to him was unwatchable; what they did lay far beyond belief — daytime terrors, waking dreamtime, the lock-up, breeze-block walls, chain-drag, the Black & Decker kicking in: winged creatures, they sing as they work. Dust and shadow, come back to that, come back with a heavy heart. Is there nothing more: is that what you heard yourself say? Children in the garden, the headlong rush, the wolf pack between trees and snowfall under moonlight: the story you told is the story you were told: snow and a frost-moon, as clear, as pitiless. He untangled the thing that had snagged in her hair, his hand through a spectrum, spectral, blurring, a rail of fingers, to lift the thing in her hair. It would rain that day: cloud low to the hills, morning as nightfall, her window open to that. Slow sacrament of cheese and olive oil and bread, the creep of sundown-sunlight on the wall. “How safe do you feel at times like this?” Laughing, he bared his teeth. A thing flew in at the open window, bird or bat. “It’s like looking at clear water through clouded glass.” They were far off from anywhere. A salted seam, just fool’s gold, leavings of a dream wherein you give a true report of who you were, of what you could become. In rainfall you’re invisible, in sunlight the same, that’s all the dream gives up: a sense of place and sudden banishment.
***
1  You said anyone could walk in with a pack of explosives as we passed through the crowds of tourists and school kids —  under the glass-grid ceiling lit with sun. I was saying: She’s our earth, our body, our sex, as we drifted down the halls of statues and colonnades and hunks of facades of Greek temples until we found room 22, “The Hellenistic World,” where a bronze face in a glass box on the wall stared back at us.Head from a bronze cult statue of Anahita, a local goddess in the guise of Aphrodite (***
“Now, tell me one difference,” my sister says, “between Old English and New English.” Well, Old English has a word for our kind of people: ofermod, literally “overmind,” or “overheart,” or “overspirit,” often translated “overproud.” When the warrior Byrhtnoth, overfool, invited the Vikings across the ford at Maldon to fight his smaller troop at closer range, his overpride proved deadlier than the gold-hilted and file-hard swords the poet gleefully describes —  and aren’t we like that, high-strung and ofermod as our daddy and granddaddies and everybody else in our stiff-necked mountain town, always with something stupid to prove, doing 80 all the way to the head of the holler, weaving through the double lines; splinting a door-slammed finger with popsicle sticks and electrical tape; not filling out the forms for food stamps though we know we qualify. Sister, I’ve seen you cuss rivals, teachers, doctors, bill collectors, lawyers, cousins, strangers at the red light or the Walmart; you start it, you finish it, you everything-in-between-it, whether it’s with your fists, or a two-by-four, or a car door, and it doesn’t matter that your foe’s stronger, taller, better armed. I don’t tell a soul when I’m down to flour and tuna and a half-bag of beans, so you’ve not seen me do without just to do without, just for spite at them who told us, “It’s a sin to be beholden.” If you’re Byrhtnoth lying gutted on the ground, speechifying at the troops he’s doomed, then I’m the idiot campaigner fighting beside his hacked-up lord instead of turning tail, insisting, “Mind must be the harder, heart the keener, spirit the greater, as our strength lessens.” Now, don’t that sound familiar? We’ve bought it all our lives as it’s been sold by drunkards, bruisers, goaders, soldiers, braggers with a single code: you might be undermined, girl, but don’t you never be undermod.
***

***
april 1  found on our driveway   like a feather dropped     by a crow      8 of spades,        a playing    card /           we played Crazy Eights, slapping        cards or holding them        as if they were birds that might fly        out of our hands  decades ago, in our childhood        like the translucent, whirling        image I imagine, prismatic and phosphorescent —         a murmuration of starlings swooping        and iridescent  but it dissolved onto a gray wall, undecorated        / glimpses of us wearing our        velvet Sunday best dresses, yours        usually crimson, mine blue           we never had nice shoes.  Now you have returned to water  thanks to the Neptune Society spreading        your ashes over the Pacific      april 2   Ceylon tea — that amber cup             from Sri Lanka, popularly known here, before             Americans became tea drinkers, as                  Orange Pekoe;                         our mother hated                         so many things —                                                tea was                                    rattlesnake venom to                                                                      her             I embraced it  ///             What did you drink, Marilyn? I saw you only with a Coke or a glass of wine in your hand? Our mother whom you felt damaged you / your life       spirals, the twisting iridescent birds               fly at me now                       scintillating, spinning                                      I blink (Our mother drank many cups of coffee with cream a day.) Our sad mother                                    I blink                                    and tell it to go back to our childhood                                    of muddy little shoes from walking in                                    the spider-filled orange groves. There, the damaging must have Begun  / she                                    loving me so much                                                                       more                                                                       than you. I wish there had been more stories like the one about the origin of her disliking tea             at 17, she went to celebrate being made teacher             of the one-room school she had attended and             graduated from at her retiring teacher’s             home, she was served for the first time — tea, she             being from a German coffee-drinking family.             Our mother hated it but politely choked it down.             Would never again touch a drop of the             poisonous beverage. From that story, we learned that our mother ritualized hating something — expected us to admire her for it.                         I took                         that negative pattern                         and spun it until I could have cloth enough for an eloquent garment. Perhaps the lesson simply made you feel yourself            helpless         ragged                      torn I never saw you that way, Marilyn, though perhaps incomplete. I pour a cup of Assam. Take a sip,             let it wash through my mouth,                         down my age-damaged throat, think of you sitting with me in your Southern California  backyard one May morning next to the camellia bush. I, as always with a cup of tea in my hand. You, smoking. I left all my family — you were part of it —  left California and reinvented myself, even mythologized myself as a tan “California Girl.” You did not become an artist or a poet. I suppose that’s why you felt damaged. If only you knew how much imagination and sacrifice it took for me to get away.                         So many small things                                    can save us                                              from the damage you talked of. For me, drinking that first cup of Orange Pekoe and making tea my drink      risking rattlesnake poison with every steaming cup, a tiny emblem of a rebellion I still try to practice. You left us so quickly, Marilyn, and without any warning this January, your house full of cancelled aspirations — glass bowls, and cylinders, and huge globes filled with sea scallop shells             you combed the California seashores to                          find, collecting these empty shells, washed free of their biological life.                                 Out of the ocean: we two different daughters of a sailor.   april 3  The spinning                      the scissors               the measuring and thus our lives are given out from the heavens, with unfair allotments and varied, unaccountable fates, born when we are, and to whom you would have prevailed in an age where women had to spin, weave the material, cut it into britches and dresses, undergarments and sheets, sew and keep clean, warm, and comfortable a household full or a castle full / men children, hired hands, maidservants — you would have done it so well. But you would have died young in such a world —  diabetes, asthma, chronic bronchial infections even in the 21st century where you lived to be 76       a world where all your skills were plied as             substitute for being an artist.                       When I asked you a year ago, not knowing that you would die this January, what you would most like to have, if money were not the object              — since clearly all your measuring, cutting, and sewing             had been for economical reasons,             not art —  you thought for a bit, raising your chin. “A swimming pool in my backyard. One I could step into every morning, swim, float — maybe in the afternoon I’d go for a dip. Many evenings, I think,” she said to me.                     Longing for some ocean?  In our portrait, if someone paints it, she will be  sitting in a scallop shell, her many jars of seashells behind her head. I will be invisible, except for the spinning  murmuration of birds that radiates             past me.  They read at her funeral, a poem from her journal about lying on the beach, the sand embracing her. How much she loved it / felt safe, felt released. Oh, Marilyn, all those seashells emptied of their living fleshy occupants. (the ugly parts that die and rot) now glorious empty rooms             in which to live an imaginary life,                         to decorate, to create beauty,              spaces to live                         a different life. What is left but your desires, locked in glass, and an image of you walking your beloved beaches, hands  full of seashells, your footprints measured, then quickly filled  with the tidal flow.   april 4  my spinning,              a whirlpool of faceted moving lights                         Everything is Numbers! down into a vortical glare that replaces             my own mind’s desire                          Everything is Numbers! Everything is Numbers! floating down             like the crow’s                         onyx feather the 8             of spades                         random card appearing             last week                         over gravel 8 legs on a spider,             the arachnid so many people seem to             fear, yet I lose track of time, stare into the wall             or any space to replace real images with my imaginary             ones, some random spider, who spins my fate Crazy Eights, the child card game Marilyn and I played pieces of eight, the dollar of             pirate Spain — our childhood in Orange County 8, a vertical infinity sign             everything is numbers / your                         fire opal that Daddy brought to you from India, and our mother paid a jeweler to set it into a ring. You wore the ring more than sixty years. I suppose it was on your finger at death spinning,     spinning to scintillate and iridesce             We never had nice shoes.   april 5  Easter Sunday. You and I always dyed Easter eggs together, our mother busy at her forty-hour-a-week bookkeeper’s job. I  was intrigued with the colors, but they never turned out so bright when coloring the eggs. You, the artist, were interested in the designs to transfer onto the eggs, cartoons, bunnies, chicks. We kept our eggs separated from each other, put them in separate bowls, neither caring for the other’s creation. Still we felt connected, even joyful, on those few holiday projects. Not enough to make us friends. My unwillingness to be like our classmates embarrassed you. You chose invisibility in school, rather than being known as “Diane’s Sister.”  That unwillingness to be like others  was what made me a poet. So many little things, but that early decision of yours, not to understand why I wanted to be weird, is what made you make so  many other small choices, preventing you  from becoming an artist. “Look away,” our mother said to us, when there were ugly things confronting us.  I could not do that. You blame our mother, yet it was you who decided to look away, even though it meant not seeing the whole world, even if meant you didn’t become an artist. Poverty, of course, was the reason we never had nice shoes.   april 6  All numbers have disappeared                         instead             there are mushrooms             fungi that has always seemed             more artful than tasty             Sipping a cup of tea / soothes me             as the mushrooms in a veloute sauce             never could.             I feel stymied / a rider             with no horse. I want only to watch             the stories unfold / the secret stories about why             you chose to marry and have children / why             I did not / the stories                                     I try to banish             blot out, replace with the diamond             dog. A murmuration of iridescent starlings,              and the spider of eight,              twirling on its silk line, projecting infinity      art             is made when you subject yourself             to the unacceptable, then dredge             yourself out,                                     find a mineral replacement:             infinity             iridescer             irised feather             scintillater                         a crystalline body whirls             releasing me from             the history, the stories it’s             so hard to tell. Until recent years, my sister and I either ignored or disliked each other. We fought continuously as children. I have in my wrist a black bump that protrudes near a vein.                                     It’s the point of a pencil that broke off and penetrated my wrist as we struggled for the long yellow weapon. A pencil, the weapon of a writer. But there was  no bleeding, no seeming-wound to be dressed.  We never told our Mother, both too ashamed of our brutality. I’ve never asked a doctor about it, the pencil lead encapsulated in my wrist. Nor ever spoken of it to anyone. I always wonder that so much must remain a secret? Why             we never had nice shoes.   april 7  Young Marilyn, Old Marilyn. there are places on this planet where I find it hard to detect any beauty therefore, silence                         No nice shoes.   april 8  there is silence   april 9  Drinking a blend of traditional Darjeeling with a touch of Ceylon / this tea takes me back to a Viennese visit, drinking this very tea in the afternoon while my friend, Jonathan, ate their famous Sacher torte. The tea seemed particularly aromatic —              “lightly scented with oil of bergamot             and a hint of genuine Bourbon vanilla.” Wishing for the moment in the past to reappear. I didn’t know the tea from the Sacher Hotel was as famous as the cake                                 until I found in my Upton Tea catalogue                                 a listing for “Scented Darjeeling”                                 under the heading “Earl Grey Blends” This tea, any cup of tea! Hard to believe. no! Sad to think my Mother almost spat out her first taste of tea. What worldly thing must I touch to bring Marilyn back into my sedate life, my sister Marilyn who died in January?  Her hand — I’d like to imagine timidly touching her       hand — Marilyn’s hand.             Her right hand on which she wore the fire opal ring.                         In that hand she’d be holding a cigarette. Smoke and fire makes me think of her —              not water, though it was that Pacific ocean                          filled with seashells                                     that she was in touch with. My old hands, not really like hers at all. She had big hands for shaping things,             while mine are small,      like birds.
***
The way my grandmother put back the green bananas, unwilling to make an investment in her future, is how I’m feeling, watching my grown children watching CNN, sitting side by side on the sofa—no teasing, no tattling— just image upon image of Armageddon: starvation, explosions,           long lines at the gas pump, and even the Rabbi abandoning town.           Biological, my son says. And my daughter answers no, nuclear. I’m too embarrassed just now to admit how happy I am to have them home again, even though they’re only visitors, no longer “at home.” I built my house too close to the water,   my grandmother used to say whenever I went away. She meant she was easily moved to tears, and it took my own mother years to teach me the impossibility of protecting the weak from the strong. Enough crying, she’d say, clicking her tongue   like she was contesting the intricate but historical patterns of sudden death. You don’t die so easily. You have to suffer first. She meant, I now know, to comfort me, to protect me from her brother’s tank blown upside down in Germany,   the long lines at the gas pumps, the clergy blissfully following their prayers back home. O but then she’d kiss whatever ailed me, while my sister railed against injustice, her theme song exploding above the cushion separating her rights from all I’m still doing wrong.  How can we expect world peace, my father would have said, —if he wasn’t at that very moment watching I Love Lucy’s slide across the world’s stage on an overripe banana—when under one roof my own two children can’t get along.   As for me, just now I’m setting the table and filling the fruit bowl, whistling like Ricky Ricardo, unaware of his wife’s grand schemes, the well intentioned but certain and coming disaster. Please stay,Grandma, I say, holding her tightly in the aisle, unashamed of my tears. But of course, she died that very day, falling into honeydews, the melons, like hand grenades, rolling every which way.  
***
I.Sleep faster, my son says. He’s poking at my eyelids, pulling at the pillows, the helicopter hum of anticipation rising in his throat as I reach out and spin him onto the bed. I want to set my heels once more in the soft underbelly of his childhood,   airlift him from danger, from disease, from all his fears, which are maybe not even his fears at all, but only mine. Yet now as he hovers above me, my body splayed out like my father’s before me, my every breath is less a prayer than a love letter torn open in desperation.   II. Remember, I say, when we counted to six million, a visualization of tragedy, one half hour a day  for two years, and that, for the tribe only; it would take another whole year for the gypsies, the Catholics, the gays, the foreigners, the Negroes, the artists, the philosophers, etc.   You were barely six at the time, your mother wondering what the hell I was thinking, and even now I can’t fathom why I didn’t just hold you close— It would have taken only a moment— And say whatever it was that I really wanted to say.   III. I’m watching Batman reruns when the telephone rings.Holy Charoset, I yell at the kitchen wall, call back later. Maybe I threw some raisins, I don’t remember. We’re already married, your mother and I,             but at the time, don’t ask, I was living alone.    And so I’m laughing, mostly from boredom, but still, laughing, while my father lay dying, gasping for breath in some dirty gutter, gunned down for a half-empty briefcase, a gefilte fish sandwich, and a New York Post which the next day would have his picture on the twenty-eighth page; one more dead Jew.     IV. You burst into the room, fifth grade facts burning your tongue like Moses’ coal. 100 people die every minute, you tell me as I turn down the TV; and then, gleefully: 50 since I’ve been  in this room, and now 75 and now . . . O my little census bureau, my prince of darkness, my prophet of numbers, riddle me this:   how many grains of sand before you can call it a desert? And where were you the day Kennedy was shot? CNN, interrupting, asks. My grandmother clicks her tongue like she’s chopping onions in the old country. Poor boy, she says, pointing. And there’s John-John again, waving that little flag, still saluting.     V. And who will remember my father when I am gone? And how many have died since his death? And what’s one more. or one less. And what do I know of my father’s father? I’m waiting outside, engine humming, as my son, eighteen, registers. And now he’s shouting,   running towards me, arms pumping above his head. He’s Moses the moment before spying the golden calf. He’s his great grandfather crawling underground to freedom. He’s my father flying medical supplies, surviving the crash. My mother must have held him close. You’re home, she cries, safe.   VI. Vietnam, I say, or Sarajevo.  Afghanistan, my son answers, or Iraq. My father would have said Germany. He could have said Japan. Nobody says anonymously. Nobody says Gotham. Korea, my cousin says, or Kosovo.  My great grandfather  says South Africa. His great grandfather says Spain.   Somebody says Egypt now; somebody, Egypt then. Nobody says suddenly. Nobody says Brooklyn. I’m counting myself to sleep, when my wife hears a sound at the door. Careful, she whispers. We’re alone, in an empty house; my every breath reminding me I’m older than my father, on the day of his death.                     VII.There are more people breathing this very moment, my son insists, than have ever died. He’s home from college, so I don’t double-check. He’s driven a long way to surprise me on my birthday. Are you sure you can’t stay, I ask, holding him close. He looks full of hope; a woman I’ve never seen before at his side. Welcome home,   I tell my wife. She’s just turned twenty-four. I’m childless, fatherless. It’s the day of the funeral; Nineteen years until the twin towers. Three thousand since Moses murdered the overseer. But that’s not what I’m thinking. One, two, three, she says, guiding me inside. How could we not fall back in love?  
***
I.   March 1979 and I am watching Nazis march through Chicago. The bold type of the Sun-Times describes a small band of hoodlums, undereducated boy scouts, the better to be ignored. My grandfather, back hunched over his Bible, agrees. Jews like myself should stay home, should lay down our stones and pray like the Jews that we are.   II.   Grandfather, you are easy to love with your long beard and the way you sway like a palm branch in the storm. It is easy to romanticize your spiritual search, worldly naiveté and wise rabbinical words. You belong in the books I read by Singer, Peretz, Sholom Aleichem. But their characters are ignorant of the chapters to come. You know where their prayers will lead.   III.   A circle. Six Nazis. Your wife in the middle. One soldier says all Jewesses are whores and the others agree. You say nothing. Years later you'll decide to speak: "Do we not serve Hitler's purpose, we who would sooner renounce our beliefs than assume our burdens?"   IV.   A generation after the Holocaust and I know no Hebrew. No Yiddish. No Torah. I fast only on the Day of Atonement and even then I've been known to cheat. A generation after the Holocaust and I apologize for my grandfather's bent back and wild gestures. I used to tremble to the rhythm of his prayers. I feared the mysterious words that kept us from the devil. Now, from my window I watch Nazis march. Their feet strike the pavement like the ticking of a clock. I am a Jew a generation after the Holocaust. Poorer, my grandfather says, without a past than he, who has no future.  
***
Scrape the sun from the wall of  the sky. Cast the great nets of  autumn over the houses. Even the throat of  the lily is a dangerous inlet. Let the world stand wearily on the stoop of  the jail of  the world and the light of  the mind, that small lamp, pearl of  shine, let the night come to it, as iron filings to a magnet, mother.
***
And the morning’s marine layer cloud cover’s   just beginning to unhinge,     to let the buttery light of another daybreak slip through And weigh down the dead lawns and sagging rooftops     of  this neighborhood, where Cold War era television antennas Still cast shadows like B-52s heading offshore, where poverty, this early     is the smell of  Malt-O-Meal and the dregs of  thin beer Washed down the sink. Where the shift begins at 7AM,     but consciousness has a way of coming round as slowly  As this old computer monitor flickers its dull sixteen colors into being.     On it, the names and numbers of  laundromat and liquor store owners, Fast food managers and lawn care companies; it’s my job     to cold call them, read from a script on the benefits of membership In the Executive Dining Club, not take No for an answer.     I’m no good and both the boss and I know it, and he’s hovering When the scraped-out voice of  the woman on my phone answers me with     My husband’s been killed, and then, instead of  hanging up,  Throws the receiver down next to something — dishwasher or window AC,     I don’t know — but something close, it sounds, to tearing itself  apart, Something cycling through an awful, screeching noise.     And it’s because I’ve paused that the boss flings a pencil Into the wall in front of  me and edges closer, and because of  the fear     of  unemployment forms or the sky opening up if  I were to walk out, And because this sound — the un-oiled, flak-fouled crack of  it —     has left me standing suddenly at the end of a runway, planes Screaming low overhead and loaded for the beginning of  the end of the world,     that I start back into the script, start back as if  I believe each word, Even though, in the rattle and dust of  the jet-wash, no one hears a thing.
***
The subtlest strain a great musician weaves, Cannot attain in rhythmic harmony To music in his soul. May it not be Celestial lyres send hints to him? He grieves That half the sweetness of the song, he leaves Unheard in the transition. Thus do we Yearn to translate the wondrous majesty Of some rare mood, when the rapt soul receives A vision exquisite. Yet who can match The sunset’s iridescent hues? Who sing The skylark’s ecstasy so seraph-fine? We struggle vainly, still we fain would catch Such rifts amid life’s shadows, for they bring Glimpses ineffable of things divine.  
***
My own heart let me more have pity on; let Me live to my sad self hereafter kind, Charitable; not live this tormented mind With this tormented mind tormenting yet. I cast for comfort I can no more get By groping round my comfortless, than blind Eyes in their dark can day or thirst can find Thirst's all-in-all in all a world of wet. Soul, self; come, poor Jackself, I do advise You, jaded, let be; call off thoughts awhile Elsewhere; leave comfort root-room; let joy size At God knows when to God knows what; whose smile 's not wrung, see you; unforeseen times rather — as skies Betweenpie mountains — lights a lovely mile.
***
A grand piano wrapped in quilted pads by movers, tied up with canvas straps—like classical music’s birthday gift to the criminally insane—is gently nudged without its legs out an eighth-floor window on 62nd street. It dangles in April air from the neck of the movers’ crane, Chopin-shiny black lacquer squares and dirty white crisscross patterns hanging like the second-to-last note of a concerto played on the edge of the seat, the edge of tears, the edge of eight stories up going over—it's a piano being pushed out of a window and lowered down onto a flatbed truck!— and I’m trying to teach math in the building across the street. Who can teach when there are such lessons to be learned? All the greatest common factors are delivered by long-necked cranes and flatbed trucks or come through everything, even air. Like snow. See, snow falls for the first time every year, and every year my students rush to the window as if snow were more interesting than math, which, of course, it is. So please. Let me teach like a Steinway, spinning slowly in April air, so almost-falling, so hinderingly dangling from the neck of the movers’ crane. So on the edge of losing everything. Let me teach like the first snow, falling.
***
When Mrs. McCausland comes to mind she slips through a small gap in oblivion and walks down her front steps, in her hand a small red velvet pillow she tucks under the head of Old Jim Schreiber, who is lying dead-drunk against the curb of busy Market Street. Then she turns, labors up the steps and is gone . . . A small story. Or rather, the memory of a story I heard as a boy. The witnesses are not to be found, the steps lead nowhere, the pillow has collapsed into a thread of dust . . . Do the dead come back only to remind us they, too, were once among the living, and that the story we make of our lives is a mystery of luminous, but uncertain moments, a shuffle of images we carry toward sleep— Mrs. McCausland with her velvet pillow, Old Jim at peace—a story, like a small clearing in the woods at night, seen from the windows of a passing train.
***
I remember watching my father stop halfway up the driveway because my tricycle was blocking the way to the garage, and how he solved the problem by picking up the tricycle by the handlebars and smashing it through the windshield of our brand new family station wagon, his face red with scotch, his black tie and jacket flapping with effort, the tricycle making its way a little farther with each blow into the roomy interior of the latest model as the safety glass relented, the tricycle and the windshield both praiseworthy in their toughness, the struggle between them somehow making perfect sense in midday on our quiet suburban street, the windshield the anvil, the trike the hammer, the marriage the forge, and failure glowing in the heat, beaten and tempered, slowly taking shape.
***
We mourn the broken things, chair legs wrenched from their seats, chipped plates, the threadbare clothes. We work the magic of glue, drive the nails, mend the holes. We save what we can, melt small pieces of soap, gather fallen pecans, keep neck bones for soup. Beating rugs against the house, we watch dust, lit like stars, spreading across the yard. Late afternoon, we draw the blinds to cool the rooms, drive the bugs out. My mother irons, singing, lost in reverie. I mark the pages of a mail-order catalog, listen for passing cars. All day we watch for the mail, some news from a distant place.
***
 Echo of the clocktower, footstep in the alleyway, sweep of the wind sifting the leaves. Jeweller of the spiderweb, connoisseur of autumn's opulence, blade of lightning harvesting the sky. Keeper of the small gate, choreographer of entrances and exits, midnight whisper traveling the wires. Seducer, healer, deity or thief, I will see you soon enough— in the shadow of the rainfall, in the brief violet darkening a sunset— but until then I pray watch over him as a mountain guards its covert ore and the harsh falcon its flightless young.
***
First, Beulah has no idea where the damn grape is. She just got her manicure and frankly could care less. She does find the cocky Cockney cute. But, so does that glittery Lil and well--- It’s Lil’s Big Show.   Lil has blood on her hands, and rubs in the almond scented lotion, while she waits for that peeled grape.   Beulah pours a large portion of gin and recalls the Minstrel shows, Bessie Smith, chicken dinners in a picnic basket, and a guy named Roy. He was no prince, but a king of the bedroom rambles.   Elsewhere, boots are beating the ground, leaving bloodied feet and untended harvests as glass breaks across the faces of Polish Jews and the Spanish Republicans fight black clad insurgents. More boots, pretty, shiny, well-made boots. “until the war” says Tom in  The Glass Menagerie. When America  sits  in a “dark room” and watches “until the war”.  Death’s stench rolls across the Atlantic, a powerful fog.  Meanwhile,   The dapper heroes roam landscapes as fake as their stage names and the heroines roll up their stockings or sweat the chorus line   But not Miss Lil and the disobedient Beulah, both swaying large hips and rolling brown eyes, generously Awaiting a man’s tongue sucking   For Gertrude Howard (1892-1934)
***
i’d rather have an agogô for a heart a djembe for a heart gramophone for a heart bison bone for a heart dandelion spore for a heart sweet cream butter for a heart i’d rather have a mason jar for a heart an ashtray for a heart a plate of liver for a heart lawnmower for a heart jezebel for a heart   instead of this flesh & blood which mars my sheets instead of this archive that clogs my toilet instead of this flea-bitten attic full of raccoons instead of this envelope that arrives already open instead of this light bulb that rattles on the inside instead of this tv box that draws attention on trash day instead of this wart that only responds to rain instead of this colander that never catches the grit   i’d rather have a heart born of the lust between a sonnet & a blues song a coleridge-wild weed hoochie coochie heart a we real cool heart aboard the impossible spawn of slave ships an undying, maroon eternally brown in the black hills heart i’d rather have a heart that beats that beats that beats that beats that beats  
***
She turns the bedlamp on. The book falls open  in her mottled hands, and while she reads her mouth begins to quiver, forming words  like Breathless. Promises. Elope. As she turns the leaves, Eudora's cheek takes on a bit of bloom. Her frowzy hair  thickens and turns gold, her dim eyes clear, the wattles vanish from her slender neck. Her waist, emerging from its ring of flesh,  bends to the side. Breasts that used to hang  like pockets rise and ripen; her long legs  tremble. Her eyes close, she holds her breath—  the steamy pages flutter by, unread, as lover after lover finds her bed.
***
The streets of San Francisco are littered with bodies of bank robbers & mobsters prostitutes & pimps   Bullet holes in foreheads   Clothes covered with that fake orange blood they used in the seventies   Just pretend dead   No sirens (those will be dubbed in later)   Camera pans an immaculate city   Mid-morning weekday only a few tourists about (everyone else is at work)   Light traffic on bridges   Newly erected Pyramid dominates the scene   Sky Maya blue perpetually wiped clean by low-flying clouds   Come nightfall even the junkies in the Haight & strippers in North Beach will have a kind of innocence   Just extras on the set   As close to Utopia as you could get in 1973   & now only attainable in a Dirty Harry movie  
***
He had to have it, his mother told him. How could he not, with so few left in the world? He felt heaviest at night with the miracle of it. He was a vessel now. A receptacle for a threatened being. What if he rose too fast and killed it? Or maybe his stillness would do it, too much sitting around, stunned and hungry. And what if the bear emerged alive and another formed in its place, would he have to have that one, too, and another one after that? 
 
He dreamed of the panda’s tiny eyes opening inside him, the doctor’s wide incision, a whirring pain, and then the furry thing emerging, the bear turning to him as to a stranger and whether that would be it—his bit part in the history of the future. 
 
 
***
Full               the blow to a gong —gone blind                         with the sight of white Silk, O milk             of my reason—                         sun reseen in My mad mad mirror.              Gibbous   Sense Less science: the   Wish-apparition of a perfect fact.               As thought, the war Of one upon one.    Half   Half a mind almost mine.   Whole              fragment, I am A being from another word.    Crescent   Bow bent back—to what release?               My lone line, the join of all I am not.   A minor truth betrays A major one— A lore             for the lyre. For it is written: liar with a why.  New               Calling all coincidence, I will Deem the dark my day.   Yet—if I say             I am lying, I am lying To you now.   O zero raised to zero—I am lying with you now.  
***
I watch the ocean square into a turning Burn. Burning, my holes glass over. Lightning Hits the beach, melts me shut. I’ve drowned Before, in the bye along a row of shored   Rocks. From the barrel chest butcher I buy Tight roasts. This year’s man, his clownish dog walks me In the park until I die on his leash and domestic Night’s sticky seizures. I thumb and ♥ it   Like liking a million times. The rich own long Lighthouses to show us how away from them We are. Past waiting for the press of his chest To my back, I hobby along to the next hem’s   Promise. Again I straddle the blade thinking This is the time it will fill the gash.   
***
As soon as I step into the tunnel that will take me under the river I need to cross to get to the city my brain shuts down.  No signal gets through and the question remains how do I know?   With a brain well emptied, and a head a vacuum of nothing, everything I’ve ever known goes quietly absent.  As still and as quiet as a house abandoned or a mouth wide open in a painting.   As soon as I step out of the tunnel scientists squabble about when we should abandon the earth for some other place.  I duck straight back into the tunnel in order to disrupt the signal.   In the tunnel's shelter there is nothing in my head, it's empty enough For the origins of the universe to begin.  A frightening thing interrupted by my backing back out of the tunnel just in time.   In the light of day what's on my mind turns out to be your lifespan. Next to the tunnel is the only safe place to be.  It is the only place where it's certain I’ll not all day not need to be crying and weeping to go on.   Which draws me directly back into the tunnel to interrupt the signal. It takes a little while for my mind to stop trembling.
***
Go north a dozen years on a road overgrown with vines to find the days after you were born. Flowers remembered their colors and trees were frothy and the hospital was behind us now, its brick indifference forgotten by our car mirrors. You were revealed to me: tiny, delicate, your head smelling of some other world. Turn right after the circular room where I kept my books and right again past the crib where you did not sleep and you will find the window where I held you that June morning when you opened your eyes. They were blue, tentative, not the deep chocolate they would later become. You were gazing into the world: at our walls, my red cup, my sleepless hair and though I'm told you could not focus, and you no longer remember, we were seeing one another after seasons of darkness.
***
Though I have never caught the word Of God from any calling bird, I hear all that the ancients heard.   Though I have seen no deity Enter or leave a twilit tree, I see all that the seers see.   A common stone can still reveal Something not stone, not seen, yet real. What may a common stone conceal?   Nothing is far that once was near. Nothing is hid that once was clear. Nothing was God that is not here.   Here is the bird, the tree, the stone. Here in the sun I sit alone Between the known and the unknown.
***
i early morning  The rain, gray god with its huge hands has shredded the roses, and clapping, kept us up all night, the bridge washed out, the troll waiting to gobble a goat. How long has he been there, wet and cold,impatient, starving, his coat rent with welts and matted with mist?Father, thundering, his voice full of  bracken and leaves, leaves that in the autumn clogged the gutters. Who goes over the bridge? Who goes there?***
A peacock on an olive branch looks beyond the grove to the road, beyond the road to the sea, blank-lit, where a sailboat anchors to a cove. As it is morning, below deck a man is pouring water into a cup, listening to the radio-talk of the ships: barges dead in the calms awaiting port call, pleasure boats whose lights hours ago went out, fishermen setting their nets for mullet, as summer tavernas hang octopus to dry on their lines, whisper smoke into wood ovens, sweep the terraces clear of night, putting the music out with morning light, and for the breath of an hour it is possible to consider the waters of this sea wine-dark, to remember that there was no word for blue among the ancients, but there was the whirring sound before the oars of the great triremes sang out of the seam of world, through pine-sieved winds silvered by salt flats until they were light enough to pass for breath from the heavens, troubled enough to fell ships and darken thought —  then as now the clouds pass, roosters sleep in their huts, the sea flattens under glass air, but there is nothing to hold us there: not the quiet of marble nor the luff of sail, fields of thyme, a vineyard at harvest, and the sea filled with the bones of those in flight from wars east and south, our wars, their remains scavenged on the seafloor and in its caves, belongings now a flotsam washed to the rocks. Stand here and look into the distant haze, there where the holy mountain with its thousand monks wraps itself in shawls of rain, then look to the west, where the rubber boats tipped into the tough waves. Rest your eyes there, remembering the words of Anacreon, himself a refugee of war, who appears in the writings of Herodotus:I love and do not love, I am mad and I am not mad. Like you he thought himself not better, nor worse than anyone else.
***
We were thirty-one souls all, he said, on the gray-sick of sea in a cold rubber boat, rising and falling in our filth. By morning this didn’t matter, no land was in sight, all were soaked to the bone, living and dead. We could still float, we said, from war to war. What lay behind us but ruins of stone piled on ruins of stone? City called “mother of the poor” surrounded by fields of cotton and millet, city of jewelers and cloak-makers, with the oldest church in Christendom and the Sword of Allah. If anyone remains there now, he assures, they would be utterly alone. There is a hotel named for it in Rome two hundred meters from the Piazza di Spagna, where you can have breakfast under the portraits of film stars. There the staff cannot do enough for you. But I am talking nonsense again, as I have since that night we fetched a child, not ours, from the sea, drifting face- down in a life vest, its eyes taken by fish or the birds above us. After that, Aleppo went up in smoke, and Raqqa came under a rain of leaflets warning everyone to go. Leave, yes, but go where? We lived through the Americans and Russians, through Americans again, many nights of death from the clouds, mornings surprised to be waking from the sleep of death, still unburied and alive but with no safe place. Leave, yes, we obey the leaflets, but go where? To the sea to be eaten, to the shores of Europe to be caged? To camp misery and camp remain here. I ask you then, where? You tell me you are a poet. If so, our destination is the same. I find myself now the boatman, driving a taxi at the end of the world. I will see that you arrive safely, my friend, I will get you there.
***
I was listening to a book on tape while driving and when the author said, “Those days I delighted in everything,” I pulled over and found a pencil and a parking ticket stub because surely there was a passage of life where I thought “These days I delight in everything,” right there in the present, because they almost all feel like that now, memory having markered only the outline while evaporating the inner anxieties of earlier times. Did I not disparage my body for years on end, for instance, although, in contrast that younger one now strikes me as near-Olympian? And the crushing preoccupations of that same younger self might seem magically diluted, as though a dictator in hindsight, had only been an overboard character —  but not so. Where went the fear, dense as the sudden dark in the woods, of being alone, or the bruise of 3:30 pm in a silent apartment, when the disenfranchised live only with the sunlight through the blinds, just prey caught betwixt and between, and also heartbreak, and again, heartbreak. I didn’t have whatever that time of life then demanded — a book, a wedding band, a baby —  but the present, like the lie of “fair and balanced” news reporting where creationists are granted air time with the scientists, the present might have me believe that “in those days I delighted in everything.” But to be ... fair and balanced ... I do trust the strict part of memory, the only archivist to have savored a passage of time and have preserved it with the translucent green hinges licked by stamp collectors, attaching it without hurting it, so I wanted the quote exactly, and go back to hunt and tag those months where I delighted in everything — then I couldn’t find the ticket stub. I rummaged through the recycling but no luck, and I couldn’t go back to find the passage on tape, and then I realized I had bought the book for my husband, so I started leafing through it, not wanting to start too far back, and not wanting my eyes to fall on a passage in the future, the one where she realizes that “Those days I delighted in everything,” but it was never to happen again, just the present, from here on in.
***
in Fort Wayne I drank the seniors        Old Milwaukee Old Crow         in Indianapolis I stopped         now I regret every drink I never took        all around          coffee grounds and eggshells      this sweating         a mouthful of  lime        as a boy I stole a mint green bra from a laundromat       I took it home to try on while my parents slept       filled its cups with the smallest turnips in our pantry       the underwire grew into me like a strangler fig       my blood roiled then as now       back on earth frogspit is dripping down wild aloe spikes       salmon are bullying their way upstream       there is a pond I leapt into once with a lonely blonde boy       when we scampered out one of us was in love      I could not be held responsible for desire       he could not be held at all     I wonder where he is now       if he looked up he might see me      a sparkling     I always hoped that when I died I would know why        my brother will be so sad      he will tell his daughter I was better than I was     he will leave out my crueldrunk nights       the wet mattresses      my driving alone into cornfields unsure whether I’d drive out       I wish he were here now        he could be here      this cave is big enough for everyone        look at all the diamonds
***
which regenerate their tails and also eat only the tails of other electric eels, presumably smaller, who, in turn, eat ...  Without consulting an ichthyologist — eels are fish — I defer to biology’s genius. I know little of their numbers and habitat, other than they are river dwellers. Guess which river. I have only a note, a note taken in reading or fever — I can’t tell, from my handwriting, which. All I know is it seems sensible, sustainable: no fish dies, nobody ever gets so hungry he bites off more than a tail; the sting, the trauma keeps the bitten fish lean and alert. The need to hide while regrowing a tail teaches guile. They’ll eat smaller tails for a while. These eels, these eels themselves are odes!
***
bear with me      it wasn’t long ago I was brainless lazily pulling fireflies into my teeth       chewing them into pure light       so much of me then was nothing I could have fit into a sugar cube      my body burned like a barnful of feathers        nothing was on fire but fire was on everything       the wild mustard the rotting porch chair         a box of birth records        eventually even scorched earth goes green       though beneath it the dead might still luxuriate in their rage     my ancestor was a dervish saint     said to control a thick river of dark milk under his town        his people believed he could have spared them a drought       they ripped him to pieces like eagles tearing apart a snake    immediately they were filled with remorse       instead of burying him        they buried a bag of goat bones and azalea      my hair still carries that scent my eyes      black milk and a snake’s flicking tongue does this confuse you       there are so many ways to be deceived a butcher’s thumb pressed into the scale       a strange blue dress in a bathtub    the slowly lengthening night      I apologize I never aimed at eloquence      I told my mother I wouldn’t live through the year       then waited for a disaster      sitting cheerfully on cinder blocks pulled from a drained pond      tossing peanuts to squirrels     this is not the story she tells     hers filled with happy myths       fizzy pistons and plummy ghosts it’s true I suppose       you grow to love the creatures you create some of them come out with pupils swirling       others with teeth
***
The owner smiles as if she knows me and pulls out a chair. Beside the doorway a copper basin lies on its side. Nana Ross had one just like it, in the kitchen, behind the grocery shop. As a child I imagined my soul was that color and sanctifying grace was red, dripping rosary-like, a kind of divine sweat that smelt of frankincense, myrrh, milk and straw. By age nine I had committed a mortal sin, let Nicki Walshe touch me there and didn’t tell, made a bad confession, took communion paper thin and white on my black-spotted tongue. Nana sprinkled us with holy water, gave me a blessed rosary from Lourdes, all blue and purple it was, but I lost it like I lost the library book, sins mounting up; the row over contraception with a priest in the confessional box in Stillorgan. Sister Anne, white musty face, those thin lips “How dare you, a girl, question holy men.” Lying bare-breasted in the long grass with Ciarán, drinking Guinness followed by Harvey Wallbangers, vomiting it all up on Pearse Street, a guy from Tuam holding my forehead. Walking away from my father’s house, my marriage, my job, to dance barefoot in a circle of women who prayed with wrists, hips, feet and drums, bellies painted gold, Magdalene red. In the Duomo di Firenze the air stinks of old blood, paintings heavy with pigment and suffering. I rinse my mouth with the Signora’s wine and that copper basin is only a basin, a thing.
***
When I think of the dead, it meansthey’re thinking of me,***
Day after day of rain. A ticket straight to the mild-mannered hell of rethinking whatever, the drive to EconoFoods: not a lot of grief in that. You need staples — bread, rice, eggs. Here’s a list: almonds, yogurt, all the little anti-griefs add up. Did I tell you? my grandfather sings from the grave. They have my old Philco here. I know all about your world of godawful and too bad. I keep driving. In rain. Some luck required. Stop light. Flashy cars on both sides playing radios too loud. Ear damage! I used to shout out the window, my boy in the front seat trying hard to shrink, not to know who is that crazy at the wheel. Grandfather likes saying: what? Half-deaf even now. Half a lot of things, anytime. Half, what gives? giving way. If there is a we or a you or an I finally. He’d cup an ear if he had an ear. So it is, the first anti-grief, a feather he picked up. My childhood, walking with the oldest man I ever, 1874 his start date. Alarm and Should Have, two roads he would not cross, and Consequence a street over, he ignored completely. Always an eye out for the great small peculiar. A feather. Sometimes handed to me. Or he’d oil a clock with it right off the curb. Into a pocket.
***
Carnations are best. Or roses, tight, before they go blowsy. Daffodils last. Tulips are no good —  go limp soon as you look at ’em. Lilies are OK, but mark us with rust you can’t shift. Mam asks too many questions. We leave the lilies. Doug and me — we’re quick. When the earth is fresh we circle in to harvest. This is our meadow. Stem first into plaggy bags we ribbon from our pockets, then off, running the back way to the village. To the florist, past wreaths and In Memoriams, where the old lady will peer at our haul, sniff, mebbe give us change from her pouch. Her sleeve is more snot-streaked than mine. And nails blacker. Some days Mam says she don’t understand why I leave me tea but other times I’ve hollow legs. I shrug. Tongue the toffee in a back tooth.
***
The parrot, Einstein of birds, who can count and reason calmly in our tongue while outliving us, disdains the ostrich. For all its sprint records, the ostrich will be remembered for hiding from the truth. You can’t outrun stupid. We the people hold some truths to be self-evident: our magnificent brain in a body that can’t flee, can’t smell fear, can’t hear death, can’t see straight. Even so, our retinas, with rods and cones as intricate as any telescope array, evolved to see a predator slide out of oblique shadow and give us time to bolt. We survey our closed dominion until we look up in August to find comet dust flaring in the night. This vastness, this vertiginous awareness mocking gravity on our speck of now, wakes us with a recalibrating jolt. But soon our familiar star will claw toward us in seven-league boots from the east, drawing its Valium thread across our planet as if to cloak a birdcage to muffle questions that blink through dark matter and would pour over us until we drowned, dreaming of amnesia.
***
Bored in the balcony reading your novel hoping it will keep me awake —  religion was always a blind spot —  with my Sunday headache waiting for the service to finish so I can retrieve my little chorister, no god in us but song, while pale important teenage Sophia in blue head chorister ribbon, face dumpy as a Flemish burgomaster, bosses littler kids and loves leading them expressionless in paired rows from the choir stalls, holding the processional cross high, shushing and huffily eyeing them for babyish disregard of cleanly neatness, my own chorister dripping orts of tissues she stows in her sleeves for sniffles, in the choir room struggles out of her ruff ringed dark brown inside from years of child chorister sweat, hair oil, dead skin. Me: Your other ruff was white and clean! Her: Sophia said it was too big. She gave me this one instead. I showed her it was dirty and tight. She said “deal with it.”***
A large gray jumped, what I can only imagine is a dingo fence last night and made it at least 5 feet off the ground, under a full moon a million miles away, granite rocks and pine trees sealing a Cormac McCarthy evening. Wire song on cold wind musing low, tension wang and resonance, the land and ghosts play along and now and then a sheep bleets, but it hardly makes a bar onto these wire songs ...
 

Small spinifex spin
down from a spirit circle;
the writers cottage ... 
 

(A pact made above the cottage by local artisans … winds rest for the time being ... )
 

No ghosting to report on this tour but aplenty haunting of words, sentences prematurely entertained that have the capacity to poltergeist and a writer’s biting off; too much in a spell! To only want that wire song later to floss with, when civilized nights of too much consumer discount become morose, head aching to be left alone and  everyone thinks you need to be alone when you only want to sing aloud and be heard in the ides of a full moon over pine trees and granite boulders, simple, wire song ...    
***
We were the land's before we were. Or the land was ours before you were a land. Or this land was our land, it was not your land. We were the land before we were people, loamy roamers rising, so the stories go, or formed of clay, spit into with breath reeking soul— What's America, but the legend of Rock 'n' Roll? Red rocks, blood clots bearing boys, blood sands swimming being from women's hands, we originate, originally, spontaneous as hemorrhage. Un-possessing of what we still are possessed by, possessed by what we now no more possess. We were the land before we were people, dreamy sunbeams where sun don't shine, so the stories go, or pulled up a hole, clawing past ants and roots— Dineh in documentaries scoff DNA evidence off. They landed late, but canyons spoke them home. Nomadic Turkish horse tribes they don't know. What's America, but the legend of Stop 'n' Go? Could be cousins, left on the land bridge, contrary to popular belief, that was a two-way toll. In any case we'd claim them, give them some place to stay. Such as we were we gave most things outright (the deed of the theft was many deeds and leases and claim stakes and tenure disputes and moved plat markers stolen still today . . .) We were the land before we were a people, earthdivers, her darling mudpuppies, so the stories go, or emerging, fully forming from flesh of earth— The land, not the least vaguely, realizing in all four directions, still storied, art-filled, fully enhanced. Such as she is, such as she wills us to become.
***
Thunder loves you, mumbles charms to warm you—folded cold body.   Lightning’s pity picks you, licks a kiss, but what’s left to wick?   Even direct hits miss— no amount of flash and hiss fires you. Inviolate virgin,   inflammable channel to Gods long gone or gone underground, ghost-gray flecks left in the rock   altar, your shelter for five centuries where you huddled, red-painted hair and wreathed with feathers.   Weave threads of your shawl— not a shroud since you were live when left for dead—weave cover   please, I beg your handlers. Pull stitches so that wound closes over your smoldered remains.   They say you clutch your mother’s hair, strands in a bag sent up the mountain, an introduction to the Gods   of Science, who read threaded DNA to determine who you were related to when human.   Not the crushed boy near you, no brother he nor sister the girl, bound away to sacred silence,   cased in plastic cased in glass. Visitors point and justify the past:See what they did—child sacrifice.  Fattened ’em up, drugged ’em— Spanish violence, Christian influence, border fences, all deserved because of her   wad of coca leaves and elaborate braids. Lightning’s mark spares you display. Singed cheek and blasted chest,   blackened flesh looks less asleep, flashed back the fact you’re dead, a charred mummy, so far gone even   Lightning’s longing couldn’t wake you. Thunder won’t forget you, hums a generator’s song in cooler vents   to your coiled form in cold storage— song of your six years plus five centuries come to this: doom, doom, doom.   Lightning still sighs: release, release, release.
***
In the new century, we lose the art of many things.   For example, at the beep, I communicate using the wrong machine.   I called to say we have two lives and only one of them is real.   When the phone rings: you could be anybody. In the evening: you are homeless   and hunting for good light, as safe a place as any to make a bed for the night.   In both my lives, my nerves go bust. I’m certain that I’m not   as I appear, that I’m a figment and you’re not really here.   The struggle is authenticity.   I have a message. You must believe me.
***
Our stone wall was built by slaves and my bones, my bones are paid for. We have two   of everything, twice heavy in our pockets, warming our two big hands.   This is the story, as I know it. One morning: the ships came, as foretold, and death pearl-handled, almost   and completely. How cheap a date I turned out to be.   Each finger weak with the memory: lost teeth, regret. Our ghosts walk the shoulders of the road at night. I get the feeling you’ve been lying to me.
***
In the half-light, I am most at home, my shadow as company.   When I feel hot, I push a button to make it stop. I mean this stain on my mind I can’t get out. How human   I seem. Like modern man, I traffic in extinction. I have a gift. Like an animal, I sustain.   A flock of birds when touched, I scatter. I won’t approach until the back is turned.   My heart betrays. I confess: I am afraid. How selfish of me. When there’s no one here, I halve   the distance between our bodies infinitesimally. In this long passageway, I pose   against the wallpaper, dig my heels in, catch the light. In my vision, the back door opens   on a garden that is always in bloom. The dogs are chained so they can’t attack like I know   they want to. In the next yard over, honeybees swarm and their sound is huge.
***
I was listening for the dog when the locks were pried open. The man was dead. The dog, a survivor, was dead. It happens   more often this way. A disease left untreated; the body, in confusion, gives in.   The bomb breathes its fire down the hallway, the son comes back in pieces; the body, in confusion, gives in.   The grief is a planet. A dust ring. A small moon that’s been hidden under my pillow, that’s been changing the way my body moves this whole time.
***
The eye is drawn to that single yellow star that no wise man will follow. The hunched men in caps, the grimacing woman her eyes screwed up, cheeks hollow. We look and look again until we burn a hole in the paper. We strive to learn from their resignation but it is beyond us. We let them burn.
***
The problem— it’s not been written yet, the omens: the headless owl, the bobcat struck, the red wolf where she could not be.   None of it done and yet it’s over.   Nothing yet of night     when she called me closer asked me to bring her crow painting to stay straight across from her feet so she could waken into it,          remember her friend.   Of Old Chief alongside her shoulder                            still watching over her just as the mountain had done throughout her Alberta childhood.   The Pendleton shroud bearing our braids, her figure in flaming pyre.   The cards, the notes, the tasks the things undone,     not done and she with us        faraway as this has always been    and ever will continue.                                       We meet we leave we meld and vaporize from whatever it was that held us human   in this life.   And all the beautiful things that lead our thoughts and give us reason remain despite the leaving and all I know         is what you know   when it is over said and done it was a time                   and there was never enough of it.  
***
It wasn’t socks missing from his feet, not elbow cloth unraveled unilaterally, not equal displacement of chin and brow, nor the eye that sat a bit lower on the right, it was his knuckle that made me weep, clove corners gone wayside, like minuscule meat hooks clawed away bits of him each shift he made, invisible a timeliness unfurled. It was his muscle torn through, festering, the prosthetic hand, finger- width dismay all across his attempted grin, left there just like that, for anyone to see—it was his mercy. In the end we’re rarely beautiful, mostly placed away from compromising situations into poses offsetting what has become of us in some gawker’s unnerving eyes. Yet, he was, is, still here in mine, and I’m human because of it. Maybe only. Maybe.
***
America, I sing back. Sing back what sung you in. Sing back the moment you cherished breath. Sing you home into yourself and back to reason.   Before America began to sing, I sung her to sleep, held her cradleboard, wept her into day. My song gave her creation, prepared her delivery, held her severed cord beautifully beaded.   My song helped her stand, held her hand for first steps, nourished her very being, fed her, placed her three sisters strong. My song comforted her as she battled my reason broke my long-held footing sure, as any child might do.   As she pushed herself away, forced me to remove myself, as I cried this country, my song grew roses in each tear’s fall.   My blood-veined rivers, painted pipestone quarries circled canyons, while she made herself maiden fine.   But here I am, here I am, here I remain high on each and every peak, carefully rumbling her great underbelly, prepared to pour forth singing—   and sing again I will, as I have always done. Never silenced unless in the company of strangers, singing the stoic face, polite repose, polite while dancing deep inside, polite Mother of her world. Sister of myself.   When my song sings aloud again. When I call her back to cradle. Call her to peer into waters, to behold herself in dark and light, day and night, call her to sing along, call her to mature, to envision— then, she will quake herself over. My song will make it so.   When she grows far past her self-considered purpose, I will sing her back, sing her back. I will sing. Oh I will—I do. America, I sing back. Sing back what sung you in.  
***
Some teeth down there some hair and gray gums   Some grass and dirt down there some gristle and whimpers   All stupid grinning death running around the yard making a little child cry          with each busted grass blade   I had a dog I had three dogs I sit and stay   They did not disappear into the trees one day   Their brains were not broken coral on the street They were meat   •   Some leash down there some shit and tennis balls   I had a dog I had three dogs I sit and beg   Their brains were not broken coral on the street   They were not meat one day they did not disappear into the trees   All stupid grinning death running around the yard making a little child cry         with each busted grass blade   Some whimpers down there some nipples and pink tum-tums   •   Some biting tails down there some sunlight and long nails   Some fleas dug up some mange and gray tongues   I had a dog They were meat I had three dogs   They did not disappear into the streets They did not tree   Some haunch skid and drag down there some mouths one day   They did not smell like baby’s breath   All stupid grinning death running around the yard making a little child cry         with each busted grass blade   •   Some grass and dirt down there some teeth and ruined carpets   I had a dog I had three dogs I fucked fleas   All stupid grinning death running around the yard making a little child cry         with each busted grass blade   Some eyelashes down there some eating grass and mange some baby’s breath   One day their brains were not broken coral on the street   They did not disappear into the trees   •   Some sit and stay down there some meat and sunlight   Their brains were not broken coral on the street they did not disappear into the trees   They did not fuck fleas   All stupid grinning death running around the yard making a little child cry         with each busted grass blade   Some bones and baby’s breath down there some bark and seizures   Distant watery eyes   One day I had a dog   I had three dogs  
***
Daffodils shimmy in the dilated onion grass their hearts out   Shelovesme Shelovesmenot   Smeared against the sidewalk   Urine left in the toilet all day simmers under halogens   Listening to someone else breathe listening to static cling   Time to wipe down the refrigerator with a handful of ibuprofen and a bandanna          soaked in tonic water   Butter-butter Black lemons Pine-Sol   •   Daffodils shimmy in the dilated onion grass their asses off   Other yellow flowers I don’t see you yet   Noon tears down the street a terrible kid on a brand-new   Now I remember the faces of tulips   Speechless   Yellow peaches sweat inside brown paper bags   Press your forehead against the pit in the perfect peach and everything will stop          moving how about that?   •   Daffodils shimmy in the dilated onion grass their eyes closed   Close your eyes I close my eyes   Families of worms work their yellow way up through clouds in the mustard air   Slams into the yard   Pollen lies down on everything it just lies down sun the color of photosynthesis and that’s fine   Birds bark inside houses   Yellow fingers work the yellow spine  
***
Everyone has a cousin Benjamin Bunny. Peter said a walk would do him good. The edge of the wood. Peter did not enjoy himself anymore. He never would again. The brooding lettuces in their falcon hoods. The coppice gate   wound shut by weeds, the jaws of life trying to keep it closed tight but anyone can climb it. As a child I played on a gate in a neighborhood park that swung of itself   and sounded like the distress call of a rabbit. I stood on the bottom slat and backed in and out of the air. I’ll never get out of here. The gate was pure folly, without fencing on either side,   Greek tragedy staged around a doorway the imagination strains to enter. I was raised in an aisle seat with an eye line of an actor about to come through   from behind it. Melodramatic onions grew wild. I cried and cried until someone said it’s okay to cry, it means the onions are fresh. Every dream begins   with a threshold. Meat in the driveway where dogs tipped the garbage. Where’s your mouth? There is a whistle you can buy that makes the sound of a rabbit screaming   hunters use to call whatever they want out of the thicket because everything they want wants rabbit for dinner. Move your hand   along the shaft to change the call from jack to cotton- tail and back again. Once you see them nose out of the interior at your bidding what stops you from sounding   every single day? All day? The shrill imagined rabbit’s canned terror. You can do it with a reed of grass. Cup your hands. Everything alive is listening. I knew a hunter   who could do a spot-on fawn whose suffering would bring a doe into the open every time. He didn’t want a doe, though. He wanted a buck.   Here’s what I can’t stand to acknowledge: when bucks hear the sound of the fawn my friend makes with his mouth they come, too, not in pity, but in lust,   so badly they want the doe drawn by the yearning of a fawn in need of her. Everything is within range suddenly, and who am I to judge. He mounts her relief   and spring comes. No. He takes a bullet. I was caught up in theatrics and forgot whose theater this is.
***
There was a need to be weak and I met it. I appeared in the confusion between strength and surrender, as if out of nowhere, that’s the illusion. I was reared ruminating in a thicket of sorrow with a beautiful string of drool hanging out the side of my mouth like a loose phosphorescent tether. How will I know what to do, I wondered. No one does, my mother said. And then, as the drawing back of the ocean before a tsunami suddenly exposes outrageous fish on the seabed, gasping, a great inhalation placed me here panting on the sacred grass. I feel like a girl in heaven, but I am a beast in a clearing. I came to as the wind picked up and in the bay as the tide came in, what a blow to mankind, an animalcrude wind to war, toward war, untoward toward war took my breath away with it.
***
      I’m four at the hospital I was born in. From behind the nurse’s white gown and mask:   I want you to count backward from   ten for me now out loud.         *   My stepmother with a stack of my father’s papers. What do I do with it, Jimmie?         *   It was a beautiful suit of clothes, very expensive. I saw it hanging from the mirror   on the far side of his car. He was so pleased   when he found my note on the windshield. He took the suit upstairs and came back down to let me see it on him.         *   When they want rain,   they put their mouths to the water and blow. They take some in their hands and as they throw it upward cry Look here! Do like this!         *   A note to her television set was left by a woman   who then took her own life.         *   We were replaced on the line by the Unimates. They’re good at the work. They’re never late. The one problem with them is that they don’t buy cars.         *   It defies me. I put it right here where I always do, and it’s not there. I loathe a beastly key.         *   If you work hard to keep a secret, you’re resentful when it’s not found out.         *   Through our closed eyelids as the bomb exploded, we could see every bone in our hands.         *   It has a Slavic name he couldn’t pronounce. I said It’s flanged and chrome, with seven spiders on each side. That’s it, he said. Where can he but it,   he needs it today. I told him I don’t know, but I’ve got one in my garage.         *   She can’t leave you alone. Sits you down, feeds you what you don’t need to eat. It’s no use telling Bertie Mae no. And of course we wouldn’t take nothing for her.         *   I’ve killed other people. You’ll find that this will go better if you and I don’t talk.         *   Foreplay starts at breakfast.         *   On the answering machine: If you could   call me tonight no matter how late, it would be a good idea.
***
      For the young man who would have myrrh from a woman, and cinnamon and aloes,   smoother than oil is her mouth. She flatters him with it. Between her lips lies death. The young man learns that as his bride he should instead have taken Wisdom to him. Wisdom is the words that figure her as   fear of the Lord. She has seen Israel choose the ways of the oppressor. The young men Strangeness would claim   She instructs. Wisdom pleads with them at the city gates that when pride comes,   then comes shame. Let a man meet rather with a bear and her whelps than with folly. Withhold not   good from those to whom it is due. The Lord’s eyes are on   every place, as on Hell and destruction. Whose   order was it that made the ends of the earth? Who put clothes on the deep? What is his name, and what is his   son’s name, if you can tell?   Wisdom can. Still a child, she attended God when God had not yet divided the waters. It was no one but God’s to do to divide what   isn’t said from what is. If God was male already,   Wisdom was not male. (It may have been Wisdom’s difference from God that let God speak   good into being.) Wisdom was God’s delight. She was with him over the waters. The still unformed   deep would have lasted had God not given it form. It made God tremble that His call for it to be light there would not let   night touch day. (There had to be room between them or they couldn’t be what   God said they were.) God and Wisdom were two. Day and night were two also. Day gave it to be seen at once that   down was and   up. The deep had a face. God’s breath   hovered over it until there was   wind there instead. The wind is in force in many places over the earth’s dry land. Its going on like that is so it too can have extension and still not be seen.   A door woke me. It was having to open and then flap shut against the stable’s north wall.   some thuds were back-to-back. After others,   there’d be a minute or more of only the wind.   The wind had become something the trees had had between them for days now. They’d showed to their tops that they’d be moved only so much. At the same time that it was many trees,   the night wind I was hearing them in was one. (One has to be the number God has against the too-many-to-count.)   If it had a back to it in those places how far north where right then it was quiet,   the wind’s broad front was as high as just below God. (That’s where God starts to be a different nothing than wind.) If nothing’s   around the wind to any of its sides, Wisdom confides that God’s around all. Inside all God holds,   Wisdom’s at the work of meaning for the faithful that there’s good to be had, if God’s heeded. I wanted to be asleep so I wouldn’t go on making   God up out of the wind.
***
If there were a monument   to silence, it would not be   the tree whose leaves   murmur continuously   among themselves;   nor would it be the pond   whose seeming stillness   is shattered   by the quicksilver   surfacing of fish.   If there were a monument   to silence, it would be you   standing so upright, so unforgiving,    your mute back deflecting   every word I say.
***
      In dogma is the secret that renders God unconditioned,   on one condition. “If you are not My people, I am not your God.” As fashioned by His people's witness,   a made thing, God, condemns the made things graven   images are. Inscribed as born   wittingly of Himself, God is (so to speak) that Father abler than the most sovereign   earthly father to make all things good. God the Father is conceived as   for us. Purposive, stewarding, benign,   He covenants our living on. “Written in   continuance” in His Book before they took form were the parts of our fitful bodies. As if what's given with the world is   life only,   life, and not (along with it, in time) at last, life's needful withdrawal,   God's said to let the truthful keep their lives forever if they swear God does what He says. These are the portions: either I'll outlast death   or it me. Little matter which   if it's the avowed   God I'm given up to. That I'm settled in the finite is what's true instead. Living is a good I don't want stopped   even for the saved. I'm beholden to it all the way that, in its one chance each with me and others, death hasn't used itself up yet. Mine affords me another day   hours before it's light. Along with the caused things outside that I can't see, I'm here ahead of myself again toward that coupling with the ground   when “I am poured out like water.” Death's still to be heard from at its least reserved. Under its breath it primes me to pay up and look pleasant.
***
I’m talking to you old man. Listen to me as you step inside this garden to fill a breakfast bowl with blueberries ripened on the bushes I’m planting now, twenty years back from where you’re standing. It’s strictly a long-term project—first year pull off the blossoms before they open, second year let them flower, watch the bees bobbing in every bonnet, but don’t touch the fruit till year three, and then only sample a handful or two . . . Old man I’m doing this for you! You know what they say about blueberries: blood-cleansing, mood-lifting memory-boosters; every bush a little fountain of youth sparkling with flavonoids, anthocyanin . . . I’ve spent all summer clearing brush sawing locust poles for the frames, digging in mounds of pine needles, bales of peat moss— I thought I’d do it while I still could. You can do something for me in turn: think about the things an old man should; things I’ve shied away from, last things. Care about them only don’t care too (you’ll know better than I do what I mean or what I couldn’t say, but meant). Reconcile, forgive, repent, but don’t go soft on me; keep the faith, our infidels’ implicit vow: “not the hereafter but the here and now  . . . ” Weigh your heart against the feather of truth as the Egyptians did, and purge its sin, but for your own sake, not your soul’s. And since the only certain eternity’s the one that stretches backward, look for it here inside this garden: Blueray, Bluecrop, Bluetta, Hardy Blue; little fat droplets of transubstantiate sky, each in its yeast-misted wineskin, chilled in dew. This was your labor, these are the fruits thereof. Fill up your bowl old man and bring them in.
***
When I learned I could own a piece of The World I got my chequebook out. Eternal life belongs to those who live in the present. My wife's bright eye affirmed it. As do the soothing neutral tones and classic-contemporary decor of our professionally designed apartments, private verandahs before which the globe, endlessly and effortlessly circumnavigated, slips by, allowing residents no end of exotic ports, a new destination every few days to explore with a depth we hadn't thought possible. It's not how things are on The World that is mystical, not the market and deli, proximity of masseuse and sommelier, not the gym, our favourite restaurant, our other favourite restaurant, the yacht club, the library, the golf pro, the pool, but that it exists at all, a limited whole, a logic and a feeling. What looks like freedom is, in fact, the perfection of a plan, and property a stocktaking laid against us in a measure. The difference between a thing thought, and done. One can ignore neither the practical applications nor the philosophical significance of our onboard jewelry emporium, its $12 million inventory, natural yellow diamonds from South Africa no one needs, thus satisfying the criteria for beauty. Without which there is no life of the mind. What we share, though, transcends ownership, our self-improvement guaranteed by the itineraries, licensed experts who prepare us for each new harbour and beyond, deliver us into the hands of native companions on The World's perpetual course. The visual field has no limits. And the eye— the eye devours. Polar bears, musk oxen, rare thick-billed murre. We golfed on the tundra and from The World were airlifted to pristine snowfields, clifftops where we dined alfresco above frozen seas. The World is the entirety. The largest ship ever to traverse the Northwest Passage. How the silent energy coursed between us. Fundamental rules had changed. Except, with time, it seems a sort of accident— natural objects combined in states of affairs, their internal properties. Accusatory randomness and proliferation of types, brutal quantity literally brought to our doors. Or past them, as if on the OLED high-def screen of our circumstances, which hides more than it reveals. For what we see could be other than it is. Whatever we're able to describe at all could be other than it is. Such assaults on our finer feelings require an appeal to order, to the exercise of discipline a private Jacuzzi represents, from which one might peacefully enjoy the singular euphoria of the Panama Canal or long-awaited departure from fetid Venice. There is some truth in solipsism, but I fear I'm doing it wrong, standing at the rail for ceremonial cast-offs thunderously accessorized with Vangelis or "Non, je ne regrette rien," made irritable by appreciative comments about the light. In Reykjavík or Cape Town, it's the same. Familiarity without intimacy is the cost of privacy, security of a thread count so extravagant its extent can no longer be detected. Even at capacity, The World is eerily empty: its crew of highly trained specialists in housekeeping, maintenance, beauty, and cuisine—the heart and soul of the endeavour—are largely unseen and likely where the fun is. We sit at the captain's table but don't know him. He's Italian. I think on my Clarksville boyhood long before EPS, ROE— retractable clothesline sunk in concrete, modest backyard a staging ground for potential we felt infinite to the degree our parents knew it wasn't. The unknown is where we played. And while fulfilment of a premeditated outcome confers a nearly spiritual comfort of indifference to the time of year, a paradise of fruits always in season, the span of choice defines its limit, which cannot be exceeded. The sea rolls over, props on an elbow, and now is heard the small sound of a daydream running softly aground. Dissatisfaction, in a Danish sense. On prevailing winds a scent of compromise; for one tires of the spacewalk outside what is the case. Beyond immediate luxuries lives speculation and the tragic impression one is yet to be born. It could be when all pursuits have been satisfied, life's problems will remain untouched. But doubt exists only where questions exist. The World satisfies its own conditions. It argues for itself. Herein lies an answer.
***
When they were together she thought it God’s punishment. When he left she thought it God’s punishment.   When vermin overrun the city’s boardinghouses and highrises it’s God sticking a hose into the Devil’s hole to flood him out.   And when the floodwaters rose, where was everyone?   When fog risen from the lake assimilates varietals of exhaust, evolves through the financial district, renders toxic the neighbourhoods, swells over suburbs, the Devil has forsaken another project, saying sometimes I can’t fucking concentrate on anything.   He says he does what he does sometimes because the Devil gets in like water through his weak places.   When it rains like now the Devil yells at God I’ve told you not to call me that. When it rains like now. And every time God laughs at this   roofs lift off along the Eastern Seaboard. The Eastern Seaboard will never understand.   When we are broken, to whom are we opened?   God’s taken all the fish home to live with him, honey.   And when the earth shakes that’s God rearranging furniture not a bomb in the subway like we thought.   If you feel the Devil with you, he is there. If you think God has abandoned you, you are abandoned, his attention   on the World Series, more important than any one man, smiting the hell out of the Rangers’ big bats as the Giants lift fingers to the sky in praise and the ordnance deployed in his name, in making straight he way, would fill the oceans.   And each foreclosure is a failure of belief, each immortal jellyfish a failure of belief.   When those who will ruin us are elected, where is everyone?   And when I return from the desert it’s with the Devil cast out. With God cast out. Because it wasn’t really me   who did those things before, that wasn’t me.
***
Dinner finished, wine in hand, in a vaguely competitive spirit of disclosure, we trail Google Earth's invisible pervert through the streets of our hometowns, but find them shabbier,      or grossly   contemporized, denuded of childhood's native flora, stuccoed or in some other way hostile to the historical reenactments we expect of our former   settings. What sadness in the disused curling rinks, their illegal basement bars imploding, in the seed of a Walmart sprouting in the demographic, in Street View's perpetual noon.      With pale   and bloated production values, hits of AM radio rise to the surface of a network of social relations long obsolete.      We sense a loss of rapport. But how sweet the persistence   of angle parking! Would we burn these places rather than see      them change, or just happily burn them, the sites of wreckage from which we staggered with our formative injuries into the rest   of our lives. They cannot be consigned to the fourfold, though the age we were belongs to someone else. Like our old house. Look what they've done to it. Who thought this would      be fun?   A concert, then, YouTube from those inconceivable days before YouTube, an era boarded over like a bankrupt country store, cans still on its shelves, so hastily did we leave it. How beautiful   they are in their poncey clothes, their youthful higher registers, fullscreen, two of them dead now. Is this eternity? Encore, applause, encore; it's almost like being there.
***
We drank our faces off until the sun arrived, Night after night, and most of us survived To waft outside to sunrise on Second Avenue, And felt a kind of Wordsworth wonderment—the morning new, The sidewalk fresh as morning dew—and us new, too.   How wonderful to be so magnified. Every Scotch and soda had been usefully applied. You were who you weren't till now. We'd been white Harvard piglets sucking on the whisky sow And now we'd write a book, without having to know how.   If you didn't get a hangover, that was one kind of bad And was a sign of something, but if you had Tranquilizers to protect yourself before you went to work, Say as a doctor interning at nearby New York Hospital, don't be a jerk, Take them, take loads of them, and share them, and don't smirk.   We smoked Kools, unfiltered Camels, and papier maïs Gitanes, The fat ones Belmondo smoked in Breathless—and so did Don, Elaine's original red-haired cokehead maître d’ Who had a beautiful wife, dangerously. But stay away from the beautiful wife or else catastrophe.   Many distinguished dead were there At one of the front tables, fragrant talk everywhere. Plimpton, Mailer, Styron, Bobby Short—fellows, have another drink. You had to keep drinking or you'd sink. Smoking fifty cigarettes a day made your squid-ink fingers stink.   Unlucky people born with the alcoholic gene Were likely to become alcoholics. Life is mean That way, because others who drank as much or more didn't Succumb, but just kept on drinking—and didn't Do cocaine, and didn't get fucked up, and just didn't!   The dead are gone— Their thousand and one nights vanished into dawn. Were they nothing but tubs of guts, suitably gowned, waiting around Till dawn turned into day? Last round! Construction of the new Second Avenue subway enters the ground.   Aldrich once protested to Elaine that his bill for the night was too high. She showed him his tab was for seventeen Scotches and he started to cry. (Or was it eighteen?) We were the scene. Now the floor has been swept clean.   Everyone's gone. Elaine and Elaine's have vanished into the dawn. Elaine the woman, who weighed hundreds of pounds, is floating around— Her ghost calls out: Last round! Wailing, construction of the new Second Avenue subway pounds the ground.  
***
Right now, a dog tied up in the street is barking With the grief of being left, A dog bereft. Right now, a car is parking.   The dog emits Petals of a barking flower and barking flakes of snow That float upward from the street below To where another victim sits:   Who listens to the whole city And the dog honking like a car alarm, And doesn’t mean the dog any harm, And doesn’t feel any pity.
***
The speckled pigeon standing on the ledge Outside the window is Jack Kennedy— Standing on one leg and looking jerkily around And staring straight into the room at me.   Ask not what your country can do for you— Ask what you can do for your country. Here’s how. That wouldn’t be the way I’d do it.   I’m afraid you leave me no choice now. The sequence begins with the grooves Of the carving board Filling with roast beef blood.   Everything keeps changing and we want it to, But don’t want anything to change. The pigeons fly back and forth And look like they’re looking for something.   I went to sleep in Havana, Turned over on my back in Saigon, And woke up in Kabul, With Baghdad as both air conditioner and down comforter.   The speckled pigeon standing on the ledge Outside the window looks really a bit like me, Me standing on one leg and looking jerkily around And looking right into the room at me.   Unshaved men run Iran. In consequence, Nixon with his five o’clock shadow Rises from the grave to campaign. His ghost can’t stop—even in broad daylight.   In certain neighborhoods, you hear a victim singing,Corazón, you’re chewing on my heart!Don’t forget to spit the seeds out! Rat-a-tat. Shot dead in the street.   The pigeon outside on the ledge Came back from Iraq with PTSD. It stands there, standing on one leg in speckled camouflage, Staring in through the window at the VA therapist.   Everything keeps changing and we want it to, But don’t want anything to change. Stet. Everything keeps changing and we want it to, But don’t want anything to change.   Every day I don’t die is February 30th, And more sex is possible. Flocks of pigeons are whirling around and flash white In the sunlight like they know something.   Here’s what. Here’s who needs to be made up. Here’s who I would do. The makeup artist is hard at work in the Oval Office. The fireplace fire is lit with the air-conditioning on full blast.
***
The fellow talking to himself is me, Though I don't know it. That's to say, I see Him every morning shave and comb his hair And then lose track of him until he starts to care, Inflating sex dolls out of thin air In front of his computer, in a battered leather chair That needs to be thrown out . . . then I lose track Until he strides along the sidewalk on the attack With racist, sexist outbursts. What a treat This guy is, glaring at strangers in the street! Completely crazy but not at all insane. He's hot but there's frostbite in his brain. He's hot but freezing cold, and oh so cool. He's been called a marvelously elegant ghoul.   But with a torn rotator cuff, even an elegant fawn Has to go through shoulder seizures to get his jacket on. He manages spastically. His left shoulder's gone. It means, in pain, he's drastically awake at dawn. A friend of his with pancreatic cancer, who will die, Is not in pain so far, and she will try To palliate her death, is what her life is now. The fellow's thinking to himself, Yes but how? Riding a motorcycle very fast is one way to. The moon and stars rapidly enter you While you excrete the sun. You ride across the earth Looking for a place to lay the eggs of your rebirth. The eggs crack open and out comes everyone. The chicks chirp, and it's begun, and it's fun.   You keep on writing till you write yourself away, And even after—when you're nothing—you still stay. The eggs crack open and out comes everyone. The chicks chirp, the poems speak—and it's again begun! Speaking of someone else for a change, not me, There was that time in Stockholm when, so strangely, Outside a restaurant, in blinding daylight, a tiny bird Circled forever around us and then without a word Lightly, lightly landed on my head and settled there And you burst into tears. I was unaware That ten years before the same thing had happened just After your young daughter died and now it must Have been Maria come back from the dead a second time to speak And receive the recognition we all seek.
***
I live a life of appetite and, yes, that's right, I live a life of privilege in New York, Eating buttered toast in bed with cunty fingers on Sunday morning. Say that again? I have a rule— I never give to beggars in the street who hold their hands out.   I woke up this morning in my air-conditioning. At the end of my legs were my feet. Foot and foot stretched out outside the duvet looking for me! Get up. Giddyup. Get going. My feet were there on the far side of my legs. Get up. Giddyup. Get going.   I don't really think I am going to. Obama is doing just fine. I don't think I'm going to. Get up. Giddyup. Get going. I can see out the window it isn't raining. So much for the endless forecasts, always wrong.   The poor are poorer than they ever were. The rich are richer than the poor. Is it true about the poor? It's always possible to be amusing. I saw a rat down in the subway. So what if you saw a rat.   I admire the poor profusely. I want their autograph. They make me shy. I keep my distance. I'm getting to the bottom of the island. Lower Broadway comes to a boil and City Hall is boiling.   I'm half asleep but I'm awake. At the other end of me are my feet In shoes of considerable sophistication Walking down Broadway in the heat. I'm half asleep in the heat. I'm, so to speak, wearing a hat.   I'm no Saint Francis. I'm in one of my trances. When I look in a mirror, There's an old man in a trance. There's a Gobi Desert, And that's poetry, or rather rhetoric.   You see what happens if you don't make sense? It only makes sense to not. You feel the flicker of a hummingbird It takes a second to find. You hear a whirr. It's here. It's there. It hovers, begging, hand out.  
***
You have the right to remain silent. That is your job. A ball gag plugs your mouth, and the immigrant girl with her loud sewing machine has been deported.   So tell us about the mind of China. We want to hear the silent blooming of its cherry blossoms, the quiet unfastening of its gowns, its songs of soy sauce and tiny bound feet.   Its trains have been blown up by dynamite, its factories bombed into silence. Its mewling puppies have been smothered and its gods are suffocating inside specimen jars. Shanghai has been evacuated   and each inhabitant issued an edition of Gary Snyder. So tell us about your ancestors, your grandfather in his bamboo cage, your grandmother drowned in the well. Let’s hear about the unmoving clouds, the stunted trees.   Read the poem we have placed in front of you. The Pacific has been drained, and even Ezra Pound has burst from his grave, his moldering hand poised to translate what you do not say.
***
The Italians are making their pasta, the French are making things French, and the Chinese cultivate their silence.   They cultivate silence in every Chinatown on the persimmon of earth— mute below the towers of Toronto, silently sweeping the streets of Singapore clear of noisy self-expression.   The Americans are in their sport utility vehicles, the Canadians are behaving reasonably, but the Chinese remain silent maybe with a cup of tea or an opium pipe and maybe a finger puzzle or water torture is involved.   Or maybe the Chinese are playing the Chinese game of ping-pong, the pock-pock of the ball against their tight-lipped mouths as their chefs dice scallions and bean curd. The Chinese are silent because it is their job for which I pay them what they got for building the railroads.   Which silence it is hardly seems to matter though many have a favorite out of the 100 different kinds— the Silence of the Well-Adjusted Minority, the Girlish Silence of Reluctant Acquiescence, the Silence that by No Means Should Be Mistaken for Bitterness.   By now, it should go without saying that what Crocodile Dundee is to the Australian and Mel Gibson is to the Scot, so is silence to the Chinese.   Just think— before I invented the 100 Chinese silences, the Chinese would have had to stay indoors and gabble about civil war and revolution or go outside and build a really loud wall.   And when I say a wall, I do not mean a wall of thousands of miles that is visible from the moon.   I mean a noisy wall of language that dwarfs my medieval battlements and paves the Pacific to lap California’s shores with its brick-hard words.  
***
It’s easy to slam the Chinatowns of America. They’re just a lot of red lanterns. Yeah, there are Chinese people around, But it’s all for tourists.   Their dirty alleyways remind me Of that strange beast called American culture. The peculiar smell of fish (how Chinese!)— I’ve eaten hundreds of meals there.   So I move on to mock the shantytowns of Asia. They’re just a lot of plywood and scrap metal. Sure, I know there are poor people around. I’ve seen Slumdog Millionaire.   I know the area pretty well. I’ve hung out in “bad” neighborhoods before Where the old men run their sketchy basement stores But they have mostly disappeared.   And it’s all too tempting to denigrate The postindustrial towns of the dull Midwest. Of course I know there are unemployed people there. I heard it on NPR.   Once I had to spend three hours In the Detroit airport, with its vendors peddling Chewing gum and soda. But people don’t really live there.   Just don’t ask me to smash the glittering cities Of cultural imperialism. They teach English language skills And how to adjust to life in the States.   Nobody really lives here. As someone involved in translation I’ve eaten hundreds of meals here. Nobody speaks Chinese.
***
Child, with many a childish wile,Timid look, and blushing smile,Downy wings to steal thy way,Gilded bow, and quiver gay,Who in thy simple mien would traceThe tyrant of the human race?Who is he whose flinty heartHath not felt the flying dart?Who is he that from the woundHath not pain and pleasure found?Who is he that hath not shedCurse and blessing on thy head?
***
To make a Japanese poem in English we must allow the silence to creep up upon us the way the ninja stalks and strangles his unsuspecting victim.   To make an Indian poem in English we must allow the waters of language to rise and drown us like the Ganges until we are reborn in a more accessible form.   To make a French poem in English we must impale ourselves upon the Tour Eiffel until our bloodcurdling screams evoke that sublime je ne sais quoi.   To make a Spanish poem in English we must let ourselves be gored by the charging bull of poesy as we run like idiots through the streets waving to our friends' cameras.   To make an American poem in English we must level the mountains of language with dynamite and in the rubble build an ethnic theme park of charming accents and seething quiet.   To make an American poem Chinese we must silence its creepy edges and raise an iron-built mountain that mirrors our own negation to us as if it were gold.
***
Day by day the Missouri dropping lower under empty sky that had drained Okobojo, No Heart Creek, Whiteman Draw; every night still no moisture. Finally, a season late, the raw parched air turned and gathered over hardpan above Oahe, grumbling then breaking open all at once, sending runnels across the fiats to spread and join and drag toward the river’s edge snatches of roots torn from ground where wind had settled the seeds once. Afterwards Will and Ellie, tromping in mud, scanned the rutted cow-paths for arrowheads that might've surfaced—traces of Black Buffalo, Big Foot, Touch the Clouds—quartz or chert or flint notched, chipped to different sizes and points for buffalo, deer, pheasant flushed out with a human howl, maybe with fire lit to the grasses, bitter scent of ash twisting in dust Ellie could smell like her own name unraveling, as she poked a glittering rock with her stick, heard the  meadowlarks question change to sputter, last flick of wings. Whatever she and Will might lift, turn over in their hands, take home hide among their things—even relief after rain did not belong to them.
***
Down the prickly cow path to the creek we journeyed as if we were insects making our way along scars in the hide of a buffalo whose fur brushed us   when the wind passed like a tide across the high grasses down the prickly cow path to the creek in chigger-shade where thoughts of time making our way along scars   lost what they meant up at the house when the wind passed like a tide across the high grasses we pulled from our pockets matches swiped in chigger-shade where thoughts of time   tasting of sulfur at the tips lost what they meant up at the house listening to bug-hum and bird-chatter and watching bubbles we pulled from our pockets matches swiped   the surface of the water trembling tasting of sulfur at the tips once by the creek we found rocks with shells in them listening to bug-hum and bird-chatter and watching bubbles   then carried the rocks back for Uncle Ralph to examine the surface of the water trembling the prairie had been a giant sea he told us once by the creek we found rocks with shells in them   Grandma June says everything was sky not sea I said then carried the rocks back for Uncle Ralph to examine none of us sure what we believed the prairie had been a giant sea he told us   we journeyed as if we were insects Grandma June says everything was sky not sea I said in the hide of a buffalo whose fur brushed us none of us sure what we believed
***
Vinnie Two Crow from the trailer at the school crossroads has walked up through the snow, bringing a loaf of pumpkin bread. Takes her big boots off and sits for coffee. Clem’s always treated us good.—You up here had too much trouble. I open the bread, and she asks about the quilt in my hoop. Stray lightning quilt, charred toys quilt—I don’t need to say that. If you want, she says, I brought some sage along. Good smoke might take away the bad, I told Clem out at the barn.—If you got an old bowl or something to burn it in.
***
She never said I’m going to die. I was with her nearly every minute that week, reading, sleeping on the cot beside   the high-tech bed that kept shifting her slight weight while the window shadowed over, then grew brighter,   and she drifted or got changed or was given another shot. None of us said it, though finally when   she was barely talking anymore, I asked something like Mom,are you ready?—I just want Brad to be ok was what   she replied. I told her he would be, as if her wish or mine could preside at his sentencing hearing.   After that she was almost entirely silent, but when Dad came the last afternoon, edgy without a cigarette,   checking over the monitors, Mom said she wanted to see him for a while alone, and he was startled. Pull the door  closed, I heard her tell him, and he did. Out in the hall, staring at the pattern of alternating tiles, I thought of Saturday   mornings when Brad and I were little, and Dad and Mom’s room would be not just shut for a time, but locked. Secretly   I tried the knob once. In that house nobody was allowed to lock a door but Dad. Grandma would shoo us to the TV   with cinnamon toast to watch cartoons, one fool panic after the next—bolted dungeons, lies and threats, a saw-blade   inching toward the tied-up body. Then real people like us, finally: Roy Rogers saving them with his amazing calm.
***
Years since I’d been back to the memorial; I’d forgotten   it was up on a rise above the killing ground. Two kids   appeared in the dust with things to sell—once coming from the far   end of the chain-link, two kinds of dream-catchers hanging   from his arm; and the girl, hunched on the broken steps under   the arch’s improbable cross, cradling a Tupperware bowl of beaded   star-necklaces in her lap. Her pink- and-silver t-shirt read PRINCESS.   I shut my car door, and a grouse startled off the fence, veered away   over bent switchgrass. The girl— Allie—said her little sisters made   the jewelry, in the gray house at the base of the hill; maybe   her price included the pictures I walked behind her to take: the marker   for 1890, then the more recent graves, in ground seared and   hardpanned by wind and snow and desolation; tied, bandana-pouches   of tobacco, and ribbons, like fists and fingers shifting and fluttering;   a few tough bright flowers left; gray-blue sky rolling above   to the edges of horizon all around, spitting, cooking up a storm.   I stood and turned back toward the arch again, where Allie and   her friend, if he was a friend, hadn’t spoken a word to one another.   For the first time in my life I wished I’d had some cigarettes—   to smoke with them, at least offer, something to do with strangers you   might sit a while beside till maybe one of you thought of something   to say. A little thunder crackled, and we said goodbye; I drove on   toward the shaft of rain above Manderson.  No reason to think I’d   be any memory to them; a dream- catcher sold, a brilliant blue   necklace. I passed a knocked-overvote Democrat sign, and two younger   kids working on a bike upside-down, and remembered the small bowls,   empty now, brought and offered at the graves surrounded for miles   by graves never found. Rain would fill them, lift the reservoirs, clear   the air. I thought of reaching over to pop the camera-back open; turned   from dirt onto narrow blacktop, the road out, that was steaming.
***
On the Great Plains in March, the wind blows for days. Gutter pipes vibrate, shingles flap; things begin to come loose. Once they found old Miss Purdy wandering at midnight on U.S. 40, her dainty-laced nightgown billowing over her spindly, blue-gray thighs. It took three deputies to hold her down till the doctor arrived.   On the Great Plains in March the dry elm scrapes at an upstairs window, dust devils swirl and disperse across the wide, empty fields, and a pistol shot sounds no louder than a screen door slapping on a porch.
***
The squirrels are spreading the rumor: no more monkey business. The Dow Jones hops up, then down, then back up, trying for attention,            up against dog days. The Capitol dome rattles like a witch doctor's gourd. “More Republicans,”            warn the talking drums. The networks labor underground to stockpile T, A, and blood capsules            for Sweeps Week, when all hell won’t be enough to save some. Pedestrians slip into light coats of pollen and mold spores. The Enquirer reports the sighting of Satan's image over Chicago during            the heat emergency. His words were, “For the hottest deals in town,            see Sal at Mutto's Chevrolet on East Wacker.” The old elms shrug: “You think this is hot: we could tell you about hot.” Walmart and Kmart burgeon into crooked towers of back-to-school            candy. They're heaven-bound, via the moon. Greeters offer            themselves to the lowest common denominator. There's a Blue-            Light on moon caps.        Representatives from Tire City have announced they intend a hostile            takeover and cleansing of their former territory, now known as            Carpet City. Furniture City will not intervene. The NFL’s negotiating for rights to the Baptist Church. The carnies have packed up the Tilt-A-Whirl and Ferris wheel, leaving us            up to our ass in free parking. Everyone under 30 dreams of shoplifting some Air Jordans for school. Everyone over 30 dreams of going to prison for shoplifting. The hypochondriacs wake up noticing little dark spots in front of their            eyes, think they could be in the middle of something serious. “Winterize now,” say the prime-time commercials. “Spend, spend, spend!”            cry the cicadas and katydids over the scorched, moonlit lawns.
***
If it had worked out, I'd be on a train to Green Bay, not crawling up this building with the Air Corps on my ass. And if it weren't for love, I'd drop this shrieking little bimbo sixty stories and let them take me back to the exhibit, let them teach me to mambo and do imitations. They tried me on the offensive line, told me to take out the right cornerback for Nagurski. Eager to please, I wadded up the whole secondary, then stomped the line, then the bench and locker room, then the east end of town, to the river. But they were not pleased: they said I had to learn my position, become a team player. The great father Bear himself said that, so I tried hard to know the right numbers and how the arrows slanted toward the little o's. But the o's and the wet grass and the grunts drowned out the count, and the tight little cheers drew my arrow straight into the stands, and the wives tasted like flowers and raw fish. So I was put on waivers right after camp, and here I am, panty-sniffer, about to die a clown, who once opened a hole you could drive Nebraska through.
***
We real old. We bell-tolled. We   dilate. We stagflate. We   sing thin. We shake Schwinn. We   shit-doled. You stuff gold.
***
Betty Joan Perske, age nineteen, gives that look, the one that shifts tectonic plates, to Bogie, and that’s it: Germany surrenders, Japan bows its apologies, and that sailor smooches the nurse in Times Square. The world, no longer black and white, makes love as D-Day shrinks to just a time for planting daffodils, and Hiroshima grows Toyotas. Harry T. has lunch with Stalin; General Patton takes up nursing Bonsai trees. “You know how to whistle, don’t you,” says Bacall, as the moon sighs and the Earth sighs back. “Just put your lips together and blow.”
***
How did we get here so suddenly, with our bags and baggage, looking the worse for wear, the ones misfortune   hasn't wrung into anything-but-perfect strangers? Old buddies, old loves, old antagonists chat at the bar   in the Hilton lobby; white-haired, no-haired dyed-haired, ringers for those oldsters so irrelevant to proms and cruising,   to study halls and going steady—to life as we knew it. The smithereens of yesteryear, mostly orphans who’ve buried   Mom and Dad, we’re holding out in a Guadalcanal of hazard and heart-soreness: edema, angina, sarcoma, thrombosis.   Casualties mount, as do the MIAs. Why aren't we vexed? Why aren't we screaming? Never mind; we're here, upright,   and don't have time to skip the niceties, which never seemed so nice, or to sweat the threats, as the dead,   ever younger, smile toward the future from our senior yearbook. It's too late for a fallback plan. Tonight,   we'll savor the motel cuisine, pass the Inglenook, and believe there's nothing opulent as this departure.    
***
Do not make things too easy. There are rocks and abysses in the mind As well as meadows. There are things knotty and hard: intractable. Do not talk to me of love and understanding. I am sick of blandishments. I want the rock to be met by a rock. If I am vile, and behave hideously, Do not tell me it was just a misunderstanding.
***
We unstave the winter’s tangle. Sad tomatoes, sullen sky.   We unplay the summer’s blight. Rotted on the vine, black fruit   swings free of the strings that bound it. In the compost, ghost melon; in the fields(,)   grotesque extruded peppers. We prod half-thawed mucky things.   In the sky, starlings eddying. Tomorrow, snow again, old silence.   Today, the creaking icy puller. Last night I woke   to wild unfrozen prattle. Rain on the roof— a foreign liquid tongue.
***
They go, the early flags, the gory maples— so too the daffodils & Lenten roses. Other petals swirl & nights warm.   Buds thicken and cast shadows: in a thunderstorm I almost forget the ice that was.   Narcissi suckle watery paths; meadows heap up emerald masses. How green & I want to delight   except this undertow—it pulls so fast passing before I recognize it— like souls in Dante who can’t see the present,   white lilacs curdle in pre-summer heat. The parade I barely noticed was beginning is already halfway down the street.
***
In the dirt you dig fragments. Turn them and ponder.   Weed chard. Forms morph like clouds.   At lunch, you write down how in this jungle   a gem-backed toad startled and hopped away—   how June tiger lilies trumpet the sun. In the bean patch brown spiders,   egg sacs on their backs. Toddling through shadows,   sturdy, wobbling, fragile, pregnant as summer is—  
***
1   & the radio reports how in 2050 farming Massachusetts will be like farming Georgia— all’s flux, no one can say what will grow in Georgia,   where maples will grow then or whose fine taps will sap sugar from the cold in spring. Will we get syrup from the boreal forest, peaches from Massachusetts?     2   Drone strikes & opium poppies. Oil spills & poisoned wells. Drought zone. Famine. War zone.     3   Artisanal, this                                                 intervention:   what gift                                               this day.     4   My inner cynic saysdon’t bother this is navel gazing   & my friend at Yale says my hunger to be near zucchinis   will not save the planet from real hunger except I remember in the film on gleaning   when the priest in his compassion says:those who glean now out of spiritual hunger  also should be fed.     5   Ecosystem of yard or field or mind:   these cucumbers are more art than science, more daydream   than global action (if we separate the two). But digging now I feel an otherness—   life, a great inhuman freedom— here I work a plot that also grounds—  
***
1   Among all the harvests these are ones we make myth of—   heat loosening squash spicing the dew as we rush to fill   the restaurant order— haul our ripe crates.   Organic cash crop: to market, to market.     2   New worlds on the sky, sungold solar systems.   Gold balls on the chain. We map our hands in the scent of tomato.     3   Lost ones sag. Lost ones break. Birds peck. The ground oozes.   The unpicked fruit wavers. We catch what we can.     4   Basic: between stalks for hours in binary motion—ripe/ not ripe,   not mental really not boring either decisions of thumb & forefinger   forging attunement between body & vine;   as if picking were all we were made for—                              plop plop in crates                                                       in our upturned shirts.     5   I was in the field the day you called to say you’d lose the baby.   How your sac was broken, and there was no saving it, just the waiting.   I stood there, the whole day wrapped around me. I stood there, crying, smelling vine.     6   Another day of work. Another.     7   All month I thought of you, of us, the women, of all the trying to & breaking open.   Of the rainsplit? ones, the ones that burst.   And of the smells of vine & harvest. I wanted to give you tomatoes.     8   Here, a life is many ripened. Sprung, the seeded cells, a fragile mix of luck and tending.   Warm furze blur of dust & buzzing. Tangle risen from the mud & marching. Here we are not self but species   breaking as we bend & also fruiting pressing onward in the long bright tide:                 yes it breaks & yes it also swells—  
***
 In the corner lot       where they parked                               green banana trucks                          fruits                                            palmed in paper straw I smell                           bedbug & kitchen-cockroach                                                             summer afternoons Somewhere                           tailless                                                      one-eyed cats                       doting in fat garbage cans                                               screaming with the stench                             of rice & beans                                                                strawberry tampax                                   piled                                                                            high as the smell                                                                                     (I was small & slick)                                               the covers tilted                                                                               like the hat of a rock-look wino                                                                                                                      in a deep                                                                                                                             knee-bend nod                                                                                                      on a beer                                                                                                                                    can-street                                                                                                                                   Sunday morning   There were always                                                     time-thick                                                              empty nights                                    of nothing to do                                                              but listen to the        ethereal                                    (she lived on the top floor)             I-go-for-more screams                               of Charlie's pimp's woman                                               when he beat her                               for his good                                             business principles                               joy-pop the block                                                  with morning-talk     I hear the dim iron dawn yawning                                 (I lived on Third Ave.)         rattle                      nights into                                    Saturday morning                flag-bloomer                                  eclipses          just before the hunt—                          they were as big—                                    the cats                   like jungle bunnies                         fierce with fleas & sores I see window-people              hanging out of gooey-stick slips                                        sweating                                        strange          below-the-button drawers                     crouched junkies in hallways                                  with monkey backs             eating cellophane bananas                                     on a g-string                                                               waiting                                       for that last bust                       Spies with cock-comb                                                        hair fronts                                  ear-gulping mambo music                                  eye-lapping pepperican flower                                                        crotches I can hear the streets whispering                                        in the ears of yelping kids                       in the fun-gushing that                                  rippled my blood                                                    in the pump                                                       but the kids                                                                        are dying in the lot                                                             like the tarry-blown feet                                                                               of the rain                                                                                                 jingling                                                                              on the rusty-green                                                                                  of yesterday's                                                                                               fire-escapes.  
***
    1.   Balak in Hebrew (devastator)—King of Moab son of Zippor (sparrow), meaning he who was always running away into the desert as the Israelites were fast on his back.   Angry, humiliated, full of vinegar and sap, looking for the diviner.              2.   Balak (in Turkish, eccentric variant) meaning baby buffalo— something forging Anatolian rivers, Armenian fossil of the word, flushed downstream.              3.   Who drowned wading in the reeds of the Ararat plain? There the sky is cochineal. There the chapel windows open to raw umber and twisted goats. There the obsidian glistens and the hawks eat out your eyes.              4.   If you thought of diaspora, you were thinking of emerald stones. If you thought of the marshes of snails and magenta bugs, you were wading in the reeds.   Ur: like rolling a good Merlot on the palate till it runnels up the nose. Ah: breath of the unknown. Tu: also, everything, self and side of mountain.   The soul sweats. The blue knifes the canyon.   In a cave, a man lived on herbs and water; the sky’s grisaille was a visitation; the leaves were out of toot sin Jants; the angels were alpha and omega—              5.   This road goes north—   no need to ask where you are,   sentimental pop songs are stuck in the CD shuffle   there’s a valley, a river, a smoking something—   if you ask what color is the sky can anyone say—cloudless, clotted, open?  
***
When I saw his face on a wall at a party in a parlor looking out at the Hudson,   at a fundraiser for the winter soldiers over blocks of cheese and baguettes,   I had just come from some grainy footage of Dien Bien Phu in a hot black room,   where the scratched print showed the hills undulating, bodies and parachutes disappearing in jungle grass.   Between decadence and the alien Mao was propped in yellow and rouge   with lipstick and eye shadow, a real queen—part décor, part radical something   the American lexicon hadn’t filled in yet.   From the aerial cameras Haiphong Harbor was liquid light.   In liquid light, I saw my draft card float like a giant litho over the highway at 79th   the letters popped—selective service system— and morphed into gray rain—   anyone could have done it— singed, blurred, laminated—   and the bartender poured me another unidentified drink.   In the scratched cellulose nitrite, parachutes kept drifting down on the hedges of the Laotian border.   On the wall Mao was the punctum in rouge and yellow and smear.   Didn’t every myth signify confusion? Confucius, Charlie Chan, Chiang Kai-shek?   (An American vision of a place.)   The guy behind me in class asked, “Where is this place?”   Hanoi was glittering flecks on the nightly news, and the teacher answered,   “Every snake of land is someone’s history.”   We didn’t know what we didn’t know about the backyard furnaces, the tens of millions.   Even if Mao swallowed Darwin and Adam Smith swimming the Yangtze—here on the Upper West   in late spring, he was wallpaper, the most recognizable face in the world.   There seemed no point in breaking through the mask— I was glued to the colors for a while,   until the next war let us out of Asia until the sun went down on the wall.
***
All summer the patio drifted in and out of light the color of margarine; days were blue, not always sky blue. At night the word Algeria circulated among the grown-ups.   A patient of my father had whooping cough, the words drifted into summer blue. The evenings spun into stadium lights. Kennedy’s hair blew across the screen. Castro was just a sofa.   I saw James Meredith’s face through a spread of leaves on the evening news. The fridge sweat with orangeade, the trees whooped some nights in rain—   a kid down the street kept coughing into his mitt. Static sounds from Comiskey and Fenway came though the vinyl, the plastic, the pillow—   So when it left Stallard’s hand, when Roger Maris’s arms whipped the bat and the bullet-arc carried into the chasm the disaffections at 344 ft. near the bullpen fence   under the green girder holding up the voices rising into the façade and over the      river where a Baptist choir on Lenox Ave. was sending up a variation of Sweet Chariot into the traffic on the FDR that was jammed at the Triboro   where a derrick was broken and the cables of its arms picked up the star-blast of      voices coming over the Stadium façade spilling down the black next-game      sign into the vector of a tilted Coke bottle on a billboard   at the edge of the river where a cloud of pigeons rose over Roosevelt Island. It was evening by the time the cars unjammed and the green of the outfield unfroze and the white arc had faded into skyline before fall came   full of boys throwing themselves onto the turf with inexplicable desire for the thing promised. The going. Then gone.  
***
The day comes in strips of yellow glass over trees.   When I tell you the day is a poem I’m only talking to you and only the sky is listening.   The sky is listening; the sky is as hopeful as I am walking into the pomegranate seeds of the wind that whips up the seawall.   If you want the poem to take on everything, walk into a hackberry tree, then walk out beyond the seawall.   I’m not far from a room where Van Gogh was a patient—his head on a pillow hearing the mistral careen off the seawall,   hearing the fauvist leaves pelt the sarcophagi. Here and now   the air of the tepidarium kissed my jaw and pigeons ghosting in the blue loved me   for a second, before the wind broke branches and guttered into the river.   What questions can I ask you? How will the sky answer the wind?   The dawn isn’t heartbreaking. The world isn’t full of love.
***
         1.   What were we watching on the tube under mildewed ceilings in Eastlands? A Kenyan guy shaking a rattle made from a can while another guy in the band was talking to the queen   about making sound out of anything? The queen smiled. The Jubilee receiving line filed through.              2.   We shimmied past tin shacks selling wigs and bananas, coke and goat lungs;   the tine of a kalimba kissed my face. My face kissed the blue plastic of a soda bottle sliding down a hill of glass.   I paid the gang leaders for protection and we walked into the hills of airplane garbage,   black and blue plastic bags glowing in the sun spray over the heads of the marabou stalking the mounds with their knife-blade beaks.              3.   Stevie Wonder and Elton John moved through the Jubilee line. Prince Charles thanked God for the weather as the camera cut to fireworks spewing over Hyde Park and then to an image of Nairobi and the Slum Drummers picking metal out of the collages of garbage.              4.   My jeans were charred from the tin-can fires, and the grilling pig guts when some men looked up from scraps of wire—   and you went back and forth with them in Swahili before they offered us some sizzling fat, before we thanked them with our coy smiles and moved on      with Michael who took us   down a maze of alleyways where tin shacks were floating on polymers and nitrogen and a dozen pigs from nowhere snouted the garbage.              5.   You were saying “Dad”—when a marabou-hacked bag shot some shit on our shoes—“Dad, kinship roles are always changing”—   when a woman asked us for a few shillings and salt for her soup. Salt? Did I hear her right? Or was it Swahili for something else? And through the sooty wind of charcoal fires   and creaking rusty tin you were saying, “Hannah Arendt called Swahilia degraded language of former slave holders.”   In the soot of my head—I was listening— and Michael was asking for more shillings for the gang guys   who were “a little fucked up,” he said, “but needed help”— and when I turned around the heads of chickens   were twitching, the feathers fluttering down on oozing sludge; “Arendt called it a nineteenth century kind of no language,”   you were saying, “spoken”—as we were jolted by a marabou eating a shoe—“spoken—by the Arab ivory and slave caravans.”              6.   Out of bottles, cans, pipes, mangled wire—the Slum Drummers twisted and hacked, joined and seamed their heaven   into the black plastic ghost of a mashed pot. Pure tones blew from the vibrato holes   like wind through Makadara where the breath of God flew through sewage pipes.   I heard in a tubophone the resurrection of ten men rising out of coal and pig snouts   into the blue Kenyan sky where a marabou   swallowed a purse—and a woman’s conga was parting at the seams above boiling soup cans.              7.   Down a slope of stinking plastic you kept on about Arendt— “a hybrid mixture of Bantu with enormous Arab borrowings”   I could say poa poa  sawa sawa  karibu.   We could make a kalimba out of a smashed pot and pour beans into a can and shake it for the queen.   Yesterday in the soundless savannah the wildebeests and zebras seemed to float through the green-gold grass toward Tanzania.   We could hear a lion breathe; we could hear wind through tusks.              8.   On TV the guys were grinning into metal go-go drums; hammering twisted sewage pipes and cut wire like sailors from Mombasa— harder nailed than da Gama’s voyage down the Arab trade coast—              9.   So, where are we—in a slum of no language? Walking through steam shovels of light, breaking over mounds of metal as if the sky were just blue plastic?   Isn’t English just a compost heap of devouring grammar, joined, hacked, bruised words, rotting on themselves?   I keep following you, daughter of scrutiny, into plastic fields of carrion   between sight and site, vision not visionary, pig guts on the grill,   trying to keep balance between streams of sewage and the sky,   as you keep hacking, Sophia, at the de-centered, the burning text, anthropology’s shakedown.   A marabou just knifed the arm of a woman picking bottles out of plastic bags.   A rooster crows from under a pile of galvanized tin as if it were morning on a farm.
***
I The lights are out The cats are hungry The room is full of gangsters II The dishes are dirty The icebox is empty I dream of celery and a compass III The roof is upstairs The window next door A guitar in the shower IV The hours disappear in my room Where is my blue pistol The door-god is knocking.  
***
I wanted to be sure this was our island so we could walk between the long stars by the sea though your hips are slight and caught in the air like a moth at the end of a river around my arms I am unable to understand the sun your dizzy spells when you form a hand around me on the sand I offer you my terrible sanity the eternal voice that keeps me from reaching you though we are close to each other every autumn I feel the desperation of a giant freezing in cement when I touch the door you're pressed against the color of your letter that reminds me of flamingos isn't that what you mean? the pleasure of hands and lips wetter than the ocean or the brilliant pain of breathless teeth in a turbulent dream on a roof while I thought of nothing else except you against the sky as I unfolded you like my very life a liquid signal of enormous love we invented like a comet that splits the air between us! the earth looks shiny wrapped in steam and ermine tired of us perspiring at every chance on the floor below I bring you an ash tray out of love for the ice palace because it is the end of summer the end of the sun because you are in season like a blue rug you are my favorite violin when you sit and  peel my eyes with your great surfaces seem intimate when we merely touch the thread of life and kiss   7.30.69
***
During the day I play at drowning looking for the smoke of eyelashes and faded hair the lilac shadows of blood and the ruins of coffee but a night I dream of the last syllable in my mother's heart the last red word in her lungs.
***
the grapes remind me of the whales gathering salt for the oceanthis is a poem about my life you've interrupted my life and death schedule which gives me that poetic look each daythis is a poem about my life where was I before I met you? I was eroding on my way to work and slept a lot deep in the subwaysthis is a poem about my life then I met your lips on that windy day I stopped poisoning my life on Monday morningsthis is a poem about my life when I met you you were undressed like a stone in the rain I swam after utterly nakedthis is a poem about my life before you leave me to heal I will find you someone to love who will be shaped like a boxthis is a poem about my life before you leave me to heal I will become an apple and hide in a clockthis is a poem about my life I will plant these wild lines they will grow into honey and weep in the spring for you   2.14.94
***
Each hair is a poem I gave my son Each hair is my allowance from the universe Each hair is a sunspot on someone's broken heart The secrets that emerge from the psyche have no floor They will get off on any floor when you least expect them to They wear shadows that look like my mother She could stop God but could not make it snow She said the weather was a work of art Like the last streak of wonder In Medea's heart You don't have to watch human Sacrifice on television Shut your window Lock the door Wait for yourself In the corner In the night In the little house That holds your tears   There is no piano Just your green velvet And the years you spent in Russia As a little box in your mother's womb With all her curses and her dreams of men When I write poetry I hear voices: KennethKoch rubbing his forehead DavidShapiro swatting words FrankOHara blowing his noise PhilipBryant smiling upon me Neruda drinking red wine Lorca hailing a cab in New York Vallejo walking in Paris RonPadgett calming the world TedBerrigan dignifying wise-guy poetry JoeCeravolo on the radio with Melanoma in the milky sky Are you asleep? No Chopin is asleep on our new sofa He is wasting his life away His health looks like a dirty window His heart has a broken leg His breathing will go to the grave with him I'm not one to part I'm not one to hide my feelings I'm the end of the corridor in your hands This is a song of war Because love is music And its ferocious notes Are oars that pull us apart Death is incredible It is man made We change the names of the dead When we bury them In time they look back at us And see us The living Like old doors in the wind   In the beginning there were small islands Floating on poetry These islands belonged to Joe Ceravolo Joe's words are the body parts of poetry Like the little children of the fireflies Who set songs on fire when we cry There is work to do on top of the forest There are too many words on top of the forest They are obscuring our conversation If the trees aren't pruned our words will never reach Their destination: The telephones that hate love And protect the dead from living Will my daughter dress like Venus Wrapped in exaggerated hopes? Will the pill invent love for her? Will her life take place on a Mental and spiritual planet? Yes No My daughter is a seed full of steam Leaving me behind like a bad marriage Helen Helen My Helen of Troy Once I placed a kiss on a spider's web Because there is no evil in nature The spider laughed Now the kiss is as free as an insect And the better part of our love My other marriages were like the four seasons That come and go They have left me small stones That spend their nights on the balcony of life Watching Pathos and Comedy celebrate their wedding Tonight I will write poetry I will pile the world on my pillow Like a paramilitary sous chef Toss an avalanche of flowers With sunlight and olive oil.                                                                       (David Shapiro) 4.25.94
***
in the beginning there was no end the ground we walked on was a memory our shadows false stories our clothing space without time darkness was the color of angels and the stars did not weep 2.25.98
***
My angel, don't think the great stillness is wooing us: We just haven't slept the same among the letters that have a habit of Recognizing us. Those beautiful letters live in Paris all year around. For even the best of men go astray with words within the gentle depths When they are to express something unutterable. But I believe nevertheless that you need not be left without them as a Part of me, as a recreation between hesitations, The boundless ones in moments of doubts.   If you have this affection for things that don't really matter to the poor, Then everything will become clear, more coherent and somehow more Conciliatory, not perhaps how I manage to function from day to day Taking Kenneth's last words to be my daily gospel that "we must write Every day," but in your innermost consciousness and wakefulness you will Know I have patience with these black lines that I share with my most Intimate friends to say I'm still writing to you. So I sincerely beg you to have no remorse with matters of the heart, For it is a foolish, overbearing organ that does not have a place to rest Except in our sleep with dreams it cannot have during our times of Playful awareness. I only seek, as well as I can, to serve the last Wishes as a poet. What else is one to do with these unsolved hearts on Paper? Otherwise they are of no use to anyone but the dreamer who tries To cherish matters of the heart, like closed rooms to the public in some Grand museum filled with treasure, or like books written in a strange Tongue hidden in the library of moments we let slip away fearing it was What we wanted from the beginning. We stopped searching for the Answers because we could not live in their blue tents. It's a matter of Living everything. Live now, and perhaps you will then gradually, without Noticing it, one distant day live right into the answers of the heart. 8.3.03
***
Two weeks into the bottle of pills, I'd remember exiting the one-hour lens grinder at Copley Square— the same store that years later would be blown back and blood-spattered by a backpack bomb at the marathon. But this was back when terror happened elsewhere. I walked out wearing the standard Boston graduate student wire-rims, my first-ever glasses, and saw little people in office tower windows working late under fluorescent lights. File cabinets with drawer seams blossomed wire bins, and little hands answered little black telephones, rested receivers on bloused shoulders— real as the tiny flushing toilets, the paneled wainscotting and armed candelabras I gasped at as a child in  the miniature room at the Art Institute in Chicago. It was October and I could see the edges of everything—where the branches had been a blur of fire, now there were scalloped oak leaves, leathery maple five-points plain as on the Canadian flag. When the wind lifted the leaves the trees went pale, then dark again, in waves. Exhaling manholes, convenience store tiled with boxed cigarettes and gum, the BPL's forbidding fixtures lit to their razor tips and Trinity's windows holding individual panes of glass between bent metal like hosts in a monstrance. It was wonderful. It made me horribly sad.                                                       It was the same***
               1. Waking First the low drone of uilleann pipes, the river of the spine just barely quivering: the froth on a half-drunk pint of Guiness shifting as the bellow breathes.                2. Waiting A pressure sprouting in the back—the joke I told about having eaten a pumpkin seed to astonish the moon- faced toddler gawping at my beach ball belly in the grocery line.                 3. Pitocin What the     hell is this no one said     chaos I can't find the     cerulean beach, the sun-     rayed trail through     rain-cooled woods can't    find your face the     soft flamenco music     hurts I hate     it you turn     off it     now                 4. Lidocaine Flying bullets, bats, then, finally, birds. Swallows sky-diving for mosquitos above the quiet reservoir at dusk. Iridescent synchronicity, twisting together as if on strings. You must listen hard to hear the soft applause of (closed in unison) a thousand wings.                 5. Parturition Hosannas in the skull halls: I see as if from above a body brought to its knees, every one of its live cells singingHosanna for "we praise you" and "please save us" as being trains its way into the lighted room, the ravaged world.  
***
The ancients would lift           a clay spout to your lips—           water and honey and wine. I give you milk, softened          with wine, and swear you'll never hunger, never          thirst while I'm alive. What suffering I can't preclude          I'll soothe with singing: My future, for you not the greenness of a leaf          but of the leaves on all          the April branches. Fire, I give you fuel. I sweat          and chop the wood. I tender forever in you          who begin where I end as if your body is          my body, your elegance          my elegance. Sustenance, emptiness          is lack of you, yearning is the road to where you are. You are the road, the where,          the song, the hunger. Child, I give you sleep, I sing                                           you there. 
***
Show's over, folks. And didn't October do A bang-up job? Crisp breezes, full-throated cries Of migrating geese, low-floating coral moon. Nothing left but fool's gold in the trees. Did I love it enough, the full-throttle foliage, While it lasted? Was I dazzled? The bees Have up and quit their last-ditch flights of forage And gone to shiver in their winter clusters. Field mice hit the barns, big squirrels gorge On busted chestnuts. A sky like hardened plaster Hovers. The pasty river, its next of kin, Coughs up reed grass fat as feather dusters. Even the swarms of kids have given in To winter's big excuse, boxed-in allure: TVs ricochet light behind pulled curtains. The days throw up a closed sign around four. The hapless customer who'd wanted something Arrives to find lights out, a bolted door.
***
Hot hot hot, you are hot, Sun, Glaring all over my east window Burning, beaming, yellowing The room. Uninterested in me Because I'm not Mayakovsky Although I feel you insistingI wake, that I produce right now Or perish as my uncle used to say. Brave Mayakovsky, doomed Mayakovsky, He could sass you, and later O'Hara (Before they turned forty, both gone) Sassed you and sassed Mayakovsky, too— But when I try I know it's just another Instance of me whistling in the dark, Me not blazing, me not burning out.  
***
I say to the named granite stone, to the brown grass, to the dead chrysanthemums, Mother, I still have a body, what else could receive my mind's transmissions, its dots and dashes of pain***
                  1   Closing the door is supposed to open some inward source—as with, for example, the prayer- closet: the text says go in and “shut thy door.” It's a stroke of luck when traditional wisdom so matches the turning of the season.                       2   I've ofen thought of writing a poem of grotesque length (an epic, yes) and setting the entire argument the instant after Gautama's enlightenment, while it seemed to him he would pass directly into Nirvana, while the powers of good trembled thinking man was lost. It was only an instant, because of course the Buddha reconsidered.                       3   Bulls for the bull-fight must (this is absolutely essential) be innocent. The very brightest are certainly, by human standards, stupid, but after a few fights the dullest among them would learn not to charge an empty cape but turn and massacre the fancy-pants who dances there for a bloody crowd. But, as Hemingway noted, the bull never survives. I can't, myself, get excited about “life and death, i.e., violent death,” and have never been able to work up much sympathy for the brute who runs with his head down or for the show-off, who has it coming. I'll probably never develop a taste for battle or get seven novels written or kill myself.                       4   History is hard for me. I’ve no sense for it.                       5   The world—and if ever there was a self-evident proposition, here it is—the worldis a big fish. I've caught it in my net. And now, long into the winter nights, wearily, I study my net. The fish stinks.                       6   A friend talks passionately in favor of silence. I listen to him. He says, “Silence dissolves the categories” and “Silence renews the potential of consciousness.” And it strikes me that I should say something. But I've never been able to argue. And whenever there’s been a choice between speaking and keeping still, I’ve kept my mouth shut. Well, usually. And only after a certain amount of prodding I’ve produced the necessary conventional sounds, feeling the thread of words I spew inordinately fragile, certainly nothing to depend on. Whereas the craw of silence is vast and, anyway, already has us—it’s the scorching sunlight of a Nilescape or the wind across the Great Plains, burying us. Friend, waist deep in dust or sand, maybe we’d contrive a gesture.                       7   I passed the peak of my energy at the age of—it's hard to believe— twelve. Since then, little by little, I've collected the furniture of my house. I teach meanwhile, and I study, but no one knows my specialty.                       8 XMAS [after Pessoa]   A God is born. Some other Gods die. Truth has neither come nor gone, only the Error has changed. We have now another Eternity, and the world is no better off than it was. Blind Knowing plows a sterile plain Lunatic Faith lives a dream of worship. A new God is nothing but a word. Seek not. Nor believe. All is occult.                       9   Time is molecular—so much for Zeno—and each moment brings everything out of nothing. In the beginning (each beginning) the universe is only a point—no dimension—and then it’s a world, for a moment, and each moment is apocalypse. Continuous creation it used to be called, and now we say expanding universe because (I forgot to say) each moment is more. Whatever else it may be, it's always more. No wonder the poet cries “Oh,Oh,” or, on a higher level, lyrical verses. But don’t worry. I’m not violent. We all live in a residue of bright pulsations, a gob of time, an after-image.                       10   How naive can you get?—I was wondering, when the Great Year comes around to this point again and the next me sits signing his poems Keith Waldrop, will he remember back across the void of Decembers to where I drift into these speculations? And a moment’s thought answers my stupid question: I remember nothing.                       11   When I think of the books you could fill with what I don’t know, oof. The pressing need’s for a phenomenology of ignorance. Everything has horizons, and they’re not just out of sight, they loom. Yes, and they beckon. An open door is plain and simple, like a wall. A closed door is an invitation. But if the knob is turning . . . ? Well, I’m closing in, or opening up. I’ve been so bloody finicky the mysteries catch me sometimes with my lids down. But I’m preparing. I need many voices for my revenge.
***
1 She would sigh, if she could think of anything intolerable. her numbers fold, in planes she can not describe. Does she close her eyes for that faint red of processes? Come to me, by instinct or for mathematics’ sake.     2 She moves in a metaphor of action. Heaven, she says, is hell remembered. Outside her gaze, I’m stranded on fraudulent heights. No tune I know is far enough out.     3 Man is a matter of walking upright, but she suggests happiness. Her whole power is one the side of vagueness. Everything I need to know about her is just before me. What can I learn that is not already gone?     4 Mountains rule the world because she’s from the hills. When she stands perpendicular to the sun’s rays, her light is confined. If she turns, the objective weakens. We shall not all rise, but all be modified.     5 I see her long after she has gone away. There are whole systems she doesn’t respond to. If you look long enough everything is hydraulics. Out of a series of partial images, she is the one that detaches.     6 If I could remember her, we might build. Will my words be fan- tastic enough to count? Whatever happens now, we have been opposite. Please believe me, I would seek you if I had the distance.     7 Given time and invention, she will surface. She will scratch, meditate, and some story will suffer. I refuse to believe things unsupported necessarily fall. She deprives my dreams of un- reality.     8 The hardest step to take is always the next. She is written across her face. We are what we are, momentary coincidence. She is body, speaking through body.     9 She will claim, for instance, King Solomon planted baobabs in India. And it may be true. A fine long rain penetrates farther than storms. Food is necessary and  also logic.     10 Sometimes I’m angry, and not at anything in particular. She has seven divisions, but no borders. I could change your name, since you always wanted to be fictional. Another unsolved dream, under the bridge     11 She has, it would seem, no natural inclination to rise. She is whatever I cannot get rid of. She’s whatever refuses to be information. She is my absence, my only secure reference.     12 Just when I’m ready to let go, satisfaction is satisfaction. Curious text, where we’re commanded to acquire Nirvana. Nothing but impatience could prompt our abrupt recognition. she says virginity of the mind can be restored.     13 Let me not praise her past her due. She is a heap of pebbles in exquisite random. Her laughter rings empty, where there were crowds. My arms around you, my love, are phantoms.     14 She appears sometimes to be talking about other data. It is as if she knew a separate category. I tell her, weeping’s no proof of the resurrection. All of her is curved and alters.     15 She can only be pictured as catastrophe. She con- fuses concepts with irony. Her thought spreads, like children running home. She finds comfort in the most outrageous limbs.     16 The moon, according to her, is a symbol for shine. Residues provide the passion of thought. Her reflexes condition my mythology. She is the energy of my indexes.     17 When she snarls at me, my senses sharpen. Who could expect her, without lying? She is a color outside the octave. Her rituals divide my life from its labors.     18 She makes the right answer sound foolish. The righteous glory in their un- certainty. Two nuts represent us in divination. The only thing she comes home in is twilight.     19 She sits in the street, making detours. Her history is rich in in- decisions. She is present, inclusive, untransformed. I do not pretend to know how the flood came.     20 A hymn describes the monotony of her expectations. She was created from the sweat of peacocks. Children defend themselves with shame and experience. All her objects answer to the same name.     21 Better a blank wall than simple dark. The play in her muscle de- termines where my eyes focus. She sleeps at the curve of my spine. She wouldn’t believe me, if I were to tell her.
***
I   In heaven there is no more sea, and houses no longer need a widow’s walk. And no more widows, there being neither marriage nor giving in marriage. How the air hangs lower and lower on this—I hope —hottest day of summer. A faintly rotten scent the ground gives off brings to mind lilacs that have budded and blossomed. There are no more blossoms, perfume and purple gone for a year, as if forever. In heaven there are no tears, salt water wiped away entirely. One moment I breathe contentment. And then unreasoning sorrow pulses through me, an imperfect tension, as if unending. I have time on my hands. In heaven there is no more dusk, dark, dawn, meridian. And what I know now and for certain: neither the day nor the hour.     II   It seems clear enough that there is in the brain a particular pain-center, where sensations of every variety check in, to emerge as anguish and hurt. Thus there is not, as we might suppose, a multiplicity of pains, like an arsenal deployed against us, but one pain which puts on, as in a ritual theater, different masks.          It need not, even, be a great number of masks, some few faces peopling an endless repertory. From one fairy tale to another, is not the witch the same witch, whether poisoning an apple or fattening the children?     III   The doctrine changes, blows here and there, hot, cold. One more notion sweeps across the state in gusts, fiercely at first, settling then into a mild rotation. It puts things in motion. It dies down, while pressure somewhere else is building.          Called to, across a chasm of thin air, I shape the air to answer. My moments force themselves apart.          Breathe out. Breathe in. But as long as you are alive, there is a dead space in your lungs, never emptied, never needing to be filled. The spirit there, stale and sustaining, holds open every possibility, urging none. Ghost money: money to burn.     IV   On the earliest known sundial, the finger of shadow moves through symbols of the cosmos, but there are no lines drawn to mark off the hours. It does not, in the modern sense, “keep” time, but celebrates its flight, its recurrence, its brightness.     V   Hermaphrodite, sleeping. Predominance, in the visible, of the right hand —but the eyes now closed. What could there be to dream about, for one already complete? A perfect asymmetrical stability. No need to see or even to look.          To know, without having to ask. From any point on the periphery, advancing always towards the body. Both sexes. And both asleep.     VI   A scream from outside broke our argument and I ran to the door, rushed out onto the sidewalk almost, I thought, before the scream had ended. The night sky, above the street lamp, had a sheen of some dark metal.          Sirens—which seemed this evening more frequent than usual, and more strident—state the theme, you have said, of our instant: the howl of a machine hurrying to disaster. And all day, in the violence of delivery, ordinary trucks rattle our sashes.          The street lay empty, mercury lit, silence giving us no indication of which way to turn.  
***
too old for vision I must settle for dreams   specific forms of cloud   (body surrounded by body)   every sensation con- ceals a dream   fresco   figurine   sculpture in low relief  (a motor halo a mental blue)   cleft in the logical space   (wilderness or wrack)   we have lived on a ladder to the window of a room to which the key is lost   (words lost in the music)
***
An aging house, well yes he understands that—but suddenly down it falls.   And he is in a garden.   And there are animals.   And he is in a garden and there are trees.   And there are stones on fire.   And, well, he walks up and down on them.   But this is the Hebrew and, not a conjunction, merely some un- translatable particle.   Cenotaph (there is no body here).   (Somehow I can’t imagine digging a separate grave for the heart.)   And everything is cast down—plants, animals, garden, stones, fire, Tyre with its river called Litany—along with himself.   The living organism, he hears, is a symbol of the psyche.   Thinking is inward seeing. So Wittgenstein thought, and also Swedenborg.   Die, well yes he knows he has to, but thinks of it as being killed—or killing.   As if at a distance—he lives, not in life, but across from it.   And it comes to pass.   And he tries to distinguish life and its contents.   And they wheel around him, the cars, as if he were standing still.
***
How does beginning go how does remembering without forgetting go in front of me in the snow a man his back lonesome somber how does beginning go not remembering flashes of light that showed him images when he was a boy quick and blinding see the shadows in the light how does not-remembering go listen to the hissing see the light and Germany’s lightness how bright Germany is like soot like images quick and blinding how does beginning go smell the snow it’s new it fell in the night in the dark gets forgotten in images quick listen to the snow it lies light like linen something’s burning a hissing somber like images at night on walls listen to the hissing smell the smell of burning look at the soot on a white background    Translated from the German
***
We are not sitting in the train anymore as passengers with different destinations you pulled me off at your station and I pulled you off at mine here we stand each in the other’s light and are mistakable    Translated from the German
***
And then when you stand where it is quiet so that you notice when thought ends and listening begins when listening ends and seeing begins when a bird flies when you glide as a black bird and scream when you start to speak in the clear air and can speak of nothing but the light as if it were the first light when you cast a shadow on the rock and say my shadow stays and the rock passes away when at this moment it is true that it is good to attempt the entire mission you can call the desert by its name    Translated from the German
***
Halfway between crib and cage the French language puts crate, a simple slatted box for transporting those fruits that fall ill at the least lack of air.
Built in such a way that it can be broken down effortlessly after use, it is never used twice. It is really more perishable than the deliquescing foodstuffs that it carries.
On the corners of streets that lead to the markets, it gleams like white wood without wood’s vanity. Still very new, and slightly surprised to find itself in this awkward position, having been thrown into the gutter without hope of retrieval, it remains a most likable object on whose fate we will not dwell for long.
 
Translated from the French
***
The rain, in the backyard where I watch it fall, comes down at different  rates. In the center a fine discontinuous curtain — or network — falls implacably and yet gently in drops that are probably quite light; a strengthless sempiternal precipitation, an intense fraction of the atmosphere at its purest. A little distance from the walls to the right and left plunk heavier drops, one by one. Here they seem about the size of grains of wheat, the size of a pea, while elsewhere they are big as marbles. Along gutters and window frames the rain runs horizontally, while depending from the same obstacles it hangs like individually wrapped candies. Along the entire surface of a little zinc roof under my eyes it trickles in a very thin sheet, a moiré pattern formed by the varying currents created by the imperceptible bumps and undulations of the surface. From the gutter it flows with the restraint of a shallow creek until it tumbles out into a perfectly vertical net, rather imperfectly braided, all the way to the ground where it breaks and sparkles into brilliant needles.
Each of its forms has its particular allure and corresponds to a particular patter. Together they share the intensity of a complex mechanism  as precise as it is dangerous, like a steam-powered clock whose spring is wound by the force of the precipitation.
The ringing on the ground of the vertical trickles, the glug-glug of the gutters, the miniscule strikes of the gong multiply and resonate all at once in a concert without monotony, and not without a certain delicacy.
Once the spring unwinds itself certain wheels go on turning for a while, more and more slowly, until the whole mechanism comes to a stop. It all vanishes with the sun: when it finally reappears, the brilliant apparatus evaporates. It has rained.
 
Translated from the French
***
Unlike the ashes that make their home with hot coals, snails prefer moist earth. Go on: they advance while gluing themselves to it with their entire bodies. They carry it, they eat it, they shit it. They go through it, it goes through them. It’s the best kind of interpenetration, as between tones, one passive and one active. The passive bathes and nourishes the active, which overturns the other while it eats.
(There is more to be said about snails. First of all their immaculate clamminess. Their sangfroid. Their stretchiness.)
One can scarcely conceive of a snail outside its shell and unmoving. The moment it rests it sinks down deep into itself. In fact, its modesty obliges it to move as soon as it has shown its nakedness and  revealed its vulnerable shape. The moment it’s exposed, it moves on.
During periods of dryness they withdraw into ditches where it seems their bodies are enough to maintain their dampness. No doubt their neighbors there are toads and frogs and other ectothermic animals. But when they come out again they don’t move as quickly. You have to admire their willingness to go into the ditch, given how hard it is for them to come out again.
Note also that though snails like moist soil, they have no affection for places that are too wet such as marshes or ponds. Most assuredly they prefer firm earth, as long as it’s fertile and damp.
They are fond as well of moisture-rich vegetables and green leafy plants. They know how to feed on them leaving only the veins, cutting free the most tender leaves. They are hell on salads.
What are these beings from the depths of the ditches? Though snails love many of their trenches’ qualities they have every intention of leaving. They are in their element but they are also wanderers. And when they emerge into the daylight onto firm ground their shells will preserve their vagabond’s hauteur.
It must be a pain to have to haul that trailer around with them everywhere, but they never complain and in the end they are happy about it. How valuable, after all, to be able to go home any time, no matter where you may find yourself, eluding all intruders. It must be worth it.
They are a little vain about this convenient ability: “Look at me, a vulnerable and sensitive being, who is nevertheless protected from unwanted guests, and so always in possession of happiness and peace of mind!” It’s not surprising the snail holds his head so high.
“At the same time I am glued to the earth, always touching it, always progressing, though slowly, and always capable of pulling loose from the soil into myself. Après moi le déluge, I don’t care, the slightest kick may roll me anywhere. I can always get up again onto my single foot and reglue myself to the dirt where fate has planted me, and that’s my pantry: the earth, the most common of foods.”
Joy to the snail! But they leave their proud slime on everything they touch. A silvery trail follows them. And maybe this points the way for the beaks of birds that love to eat them. Ay, there’s the rub: “To be or not to be, that is the question!” Such vanity! But that’s the danger they face.
Alone? Yes, the snail is quite alone. He has few friends. But he needs no friends to be happy. He sticks to Nature, he enjoys his perfect nearness, he is the friend of the soil which he kisses with his whole body. And he befriends the leaves, and the heavens toward which he proudly stretches his head, with eyes sensitive enough to signify nobility, slowness, wisdom, pride, vanity, fire.
No, he is nothing like the pig. He lacks those pitiful little scurrying anxious feet. That needful flight from shame. The stoic snail is tougher than that. He is more methodical, more proud, and without  a doubt less gluttonous than any pig — pigs after all are capricious, leaving behind one bit of food to chase after something else. That  panicky, hurried gluttony, that fear of missing out on something — that’s not for the snail.
Nothing could be more beautiful than that deliberate and discreet advance. What it must cost them to glide so perfectly along the earth they honor with their presence! Each is like a ship trailing its silver wake. They proceed with a majesty that is all the more complete when you consider again the vulnerability of those highly sensitive eyeballs.
Is the anger of snails perceptible? What examples can be found? As it makes no other gestures, the snail’s passion can probably only be discovered by a more profuse and rapid effusion of slime. The slime of pride. So one can see the expression of their rage is identical with that of their egotism. So they rule the world in their rich and silvery fashion.
The expression of their anger, like that of their pride, shines as it dries. But it also makes the trail that reveals them to predators. What’s more, this trail is ephemeral and lasts only until the next rain.
That’s how it is with everyone who speaks in an entirely subjective way, in verses and lines only, without taking care to build their phrases  into a solid dwelling with more than two dimensions. Something more durable than themselves.
But undoubtedly they don’t feel this need. They are heroes, that is to say beings whose existence alone is a work of art — not artists who merely make masterpieces.
Here I touch on one of the main points of their lesson, something they have in common with all shelled beings: that shell, part of their essence, is at the same time a work of art, a monument. It lasts longer than they do.
That is the example that snails offer us: saints who make masterpieces  of their lives, works of art of their own perfection. They secrete form. Nothing outside themselves, their necessity, or their needs is their work. Nothing is out of proportion with their physical being. Nothing that is unnecessary or obligatory.
And so they delineate the duties of humanity: great thoughts come from the heart. Live a better life and make better verses. Morality and rhetoric combine in the ambition and desire of the wise.
How are they saints? Precisely by obedience to their nature. So: know yourself. And accept yourself for what you are. In agreement with your vices. In proportion with your measure.
What is most appropriate to the human being? Words. Decency. Our humanism.
 

Translated from the French
***
The 3-D printer worked overtime sculpting lemon trees complete with bees on budding flowers. The overheated machine filled the cardboard orchard with the scent of hot plastic. The 12th nightingale arrived like a prophet in a cloud of smoke, considering the same hand that pushed “print” remained destined to strike a single match and wave goodbye to a paradise of paper.    Translated from the Persian
***
I have never needed God as a personal savior in my practical life syllogisms about His existence were never music to my ears but always seemed vague missing a dimension although I didn’t know how to say this. Neither a philosophical God nor a biblical God suddenly appears among His creations amid revelations of wisdom in Jerusalem, His city. And certainly not in disclosures of pious inner principles and also not among poets, unfortunately. Astronomical bodies at night and mystical landscapes in Sharafat for example and Beit Jala bear His between-the-lines existence, His inklings. The expression of an ultra-Orthodox man’s eyes in Mea She’arim —  this too —  and even the purifying surrender of a sly and seasoned merchant, irreligious now in Geula, when you reproach him. Something like “Reprove a wise man and he will love you.” And you, when you cleanse yourself of anxious constraints about your environment after taking hash or grass. Springs of purity whose origins you’re unaware of bubble in coursing blood, in glands, in milk and some paradisiacal primeval revelation, and your almost subconscious innerness your being suddenly revealed —  Is this clear enough to you, heredity? Genes? Or existential uniqueness, a maintained infancy that knocks you out with a sense of a refreshing genesis. Everything becomes clear in a great light. You shed revulsion and resistance, a great love germinates within you —  this gloriousness this wonder comprised of absolutes of —  objective truth, complete justice, decency honor internalized honesty and complex wisdom enhanced down to the last detail. Ho, complete, divine purity. Suddenly you polish a syllogism of your own for decisive proof of His existence: God is an idea —  ideas don’t have material existence but they exist nonetheless so God exists definitively as the spirit of an idea, the biblical assertion “He has no body and no bodily form” is clear to me now as an exegesis that sits well with philosophy.    Translated from the Hebrew
***
I’m going to say what love signifies My grandfather said it was the desire of  the I for another I And since then I began to search for you My father said the number of  love was seven Because creation lasted seven days Seven days making love to its seven nights I looked for you in each seven that ciphered my life And I found you slipping away to other numbers One confuses oneself with one’s other self When two bodies intertwine in bed, three loves have been in my life, four it will be when you have left five days that I cannot stand you, six kisses in La Paz Centro seven years of not finding you, love, show me from one to a thousand your nights What is your philosophy of love you ask me in bed: and I respond It’s not a flower but maybe it is a number. Here, I gift it to you Hide it between your legs. At the count of two Make sure that it does not fall: One Open Sesame. Two Loves have stepped into your kingdom.    Translated from the Spanish
***
The Friend wriggled out and stood, a smiling tree, his shimmering head turning left and right. A person came along and looked up and said, “Who are you?” The Friend said, “Come on, get a buzz. It’s awesome!” The person said, “I don’t need that,” and walked off. “Wait!” The Friend caught up and tickled him, his fingers hooking him and reeling him in. The Friend promised he would be popular. The person said, “Really?” He wasn’t convinced. The Friend poured it on, slathering him until he reeled. The Friend slathered and slathered until his head bubbled. Reeling in circles, he fell down. “Hey!” The Friend tried to wake him up. “Oh no! He’s dead!” He scooped up dirt, dropped the person in, and patted it down. He acted as if nothing had happened. Then came along another person. The Friend perked up and waved.
 

Translated from the American Sign Language
***
That night the moon rose in the window. Its light touched the pane and spread over the floor. The girls climbed out of their beds and gathered in the glow, where their hands came alive. Their chatter filled their chests with such gladness it flowed out past the sentry girl at the door and down the corridor until it struck the matron’s ears. She rocked forward, enraged, and thundered up the corridor. The sentry girl gave the alarm. They flew for their beds. The matron burst in. Her arm swung and connected. A girl dropped. The hand of the moon went to the girl, tapping her on the shoulder, tapping to no avail. It withdrew, gliding back to the window and out. When the sun came up, its blaze seething into the floor, the girls gathered again at the window. They watched as the gardener dug a hole. His shovel thrust firmly in the ground, he lifted a covered figure and let drop. Its arms were crossed as it tumbled to the bottom. The gardener grimaced and covered the hole. That night the moon rose in the window. Its light touched the pane and spread over the floor. The girls climbed out of their beds and gathered in the glow, where their hands came alive.    Translated from the American Sign Language
***
   1  An Ireland, as of chalk, the sky standing in for the sea, the beach a reach of blue, the vineyards’ green scooped out in cirque, in cove, a subtlety of air laps the eyes, abob like barques come from afar, and the viator standing there, poised to dis- embark, the undercurrent of air escaping him, tossed to & fro, gaze wrenched from its angle of purchase upon the world, capsized, head now careened against the suddenness of rock, eyes whiplashed into new prospects, he drowns in fire, enflamed, fine silk aquiver at the singe of brazier, he burns: would Hell be as blue, or the sun the obverse of God?   2  Now at Laon, the Lugdunum of the North, deposited on this citadel of chalk, white arx, former temple of Lug, the light- god of the Gauls, & he, this Celt from Hibernia, setting foot on this podium, this puy, this platform afloat at cloud & wind height, blown in from the septentrion, breathes in the quintessence of rains, alevel the briar’s pinks, zone where water, at first cold snap, turns to snow. Fallen from fire. Autumn’s pure light whitens the mount, the tufa reverberating the radiance of a Cyclades isle, here mis- placed, high above these plains, by some error in translation.   3  At Lindisfarne, let us suppose — even if Alcuin’s letters to the island’s monks exhorting them to combat the Viking may be evidence to the contrary — that he studied Greek, that Charles the Bald, offshoot of the Pippinids, summoned him here to Laon to translate Dionysus. Between the king’s vineyards & the blue sky, a whisper of the North Sea in the channel of Île Sainte when the seals bark at ebb tide, Johannes the Hibernian cocks an ear despite finding his coracle of Latin too frail a craft to explore the peninsulas of Greek, & carries with him the long-lapping waves of Scotland & seaweed’s tang where kingfisher nests beside nugget of amber.   4  That which lies out of reach taking the shape of this white & shadowy rock on which he is now beached & whose slope he now climbs, blind beneath the sun, fallen from the same height he ascends, would Satan be extending him his welcome with the same dark radiance of stone between his eyes & the same fine peppering of pinks that spice his senses on either side of the stairs, against this, what whiteness, what candor? The sky’s rarified air, there to calculate the distances between the things he climbs or descends, the divisions of the world now extended, now illuminated between the lines, the borders of the intangible now flaring up with darkness, the granular opacities now brightening, the sun biting into the margins of the real, the image dying.   5  Denys, foundation of all cathedrals to come, mentor of naves, stained glass rosettes, of all the gossamer shadow spiderwebbing the light from the East as it rises, Lord of Ionia, oriental Ionas, Denys, Dionysos, your Greek sailing the great hill of Lugdunum, your darkness raining down its alphas, its Alphei, the dawn uncorking the fizz of its dations. John Scotus comments, his violet ink relighting, igniting the world according to Plato, filtering the grit of the flower through the sieve of the eye, the bran, the curds of light, sifting out the clots of theology, in this shadowy cave, the locals burning every log in sight, hoc lignum, a bonfire of stones held in common, lapis iste.   6  And if some hick might askQuomodo omnia, quae sunt, lumina sunt?***
The woman who cannot bring forth her child: go to a dead man’s grave and then step three times over the grave, and then say these words three times:

This is my cure for the loathsome late-birth
This is my cure for the bitter black-birth
This is my cure for the loathsome imperfect-birth
 
And when that woman is with child and she goes to her lord in his bed, then let her say:

Up I go, over you I step,
with a quick child, not a quelled one,
with a full-born one, not a doomed one.
 
And when the mother feels the child is quick, go then to a church, and when she comes before the altar say then:

Christ, I said it. This has been uttered.
 
The woman who cannot bring forth her child: grasp a handful of her own child’s grave, and after that, bind it in black wool and sell it to peddlers, and say then:

I sell it, you sell it.
This blackened wool, this sorrow seed.
 
Translated from the Old English
***
He was led to be hanged. How to write this scene? Was it winter? Summer? From behind the fence across the street his mother watched. What should I call her? Let’s say, Antanina. And he is Maxim. Why Maxim, and not Basil or Yanak? The stones tucked themselves under his feet, two magpies stalked him, poplar to poplar. You’ve ever been hanged? Me, never yet. And that’s the problem. So are the magpies. Why should there be two, not one? The gutters silver with spring waters. So was it spring? Alright. By the courthouse, gray soldiers, lined up in a row. In the park — ladies. And ladies’ men. And where’s mother? “It’s best without her,” he thought. Do change her name. How’s then? A truck with sides already dropped —  above it — a noose. Above a noose —  a cloud. Who’s sitting at the wheel? His brother? Son? No, a son is pushing it. A brother then. And from behind the curtain in a palace next to the courthouse she watches. Marysya? Alright, Marysya. Those magpies. Soldiers. Water. Park. That cloud again. And glances from the crowd. “It’s him ...  Not you ... Not me ... For that, thank God ... ” Bells ringing. Will he hear the bells? Behind Marysya stands the one who shares her bed. With blazing epaulets. And profile. And a hand around her waist. A river embraces the park. A river jammed with ice. Life blazes, rings. To sum it up, considering all mentioned: “He was led to be hanged.” Alone.    Translated from the Belarusian
***
From a ways, the sky and your hands come to my eyes, from some distant part of you; it’s snowing out, you’re all in the white of the snow every track in the candor a wound and the field beyond the window is a body a glance that becomes a pronouncement, the heat of breath, your head adrift in sleeplessness; that’s where it returns, in a word translated into silence where the sparrows tie loose knots your palms on your eyes, chest on your knees forehead in the snow.    Translated from the Italian
***
My eyes turned to salt in looking back, my thoughts stood still in gestures, in the silence of what’s been done; I gathered the crumbs of another lunch and shook them into the garden’s vitreous air where the sun’s just cracked and spilled. Here, even a flutter of blackbird beyond the hedge stands still, as my words stand still, like ships in bottles. Your language is mine but mine is not yours. At home, I could feel myself thinking while the television glowed in shadow and a film score spread like smoke in a saloon. I keep to myself what it means to tend a fire, the thick scent of soaked wood, a match between my fingers, the way a day resides in what’s to do, in another light split by the clouds, a different sunset tied to the tallest trees flush in the eyes of houses, on the poor man’s livestock; a touch here, a touch there — the way loneliness comes, today, a day like this, one day more alone.    Translated from the Italian
***
the porcelain cup is similar to my skull. when i grasp the cup firmly with my hand an arm out of nowhere sprouts on my arm like a graft and the hand on that arm raises the porcelain cup high and hurls it to the wooden floor. since that arm is safeguarding the porcelain cup the thing that is broken into pieces then is my skull that is similar to the porcelain cup. even if my arm had moved before the graft-arm slid into my arm like a snake the white paper that warded off flood would have ripped. yet my arm continues to safeguard the porcelain cup.
 

Translated from the Korean
***
Say what you like about Charaxos, that’s a fellow with a fat-bellied ship always in some port or other. What does Zeus care, or the rest of his gang? Now you’d like me on my knees, crying out to Hera, “Blah, blah, blah, bring him home safe and free of warts,” or blubbering, “Wah, wah, wah, thank you, thank you, for curing my liver condition.” Good grief, gods do what they like. They call down hurricanes with a whisper or send off a tsunami the way you would a love letter. If they have a whim, they make some henchmen fix it up, like those idiots in the Iliad. A puff of smoke, a little fog, away goes the hero, it’s happily ever after. As for Larichos, that lay-a-bed lives for the pillow. If for once he’d get off his ass, he might make something of himself. Then from that reeking sewer of my life I might haul up a bucket of spring water.    Translated from the Greek
***
we had to read the instructions as we sank. In a hand like carded lace. Not nuclear warheads on the sea's floor nor the violet flow over the reactor will outlive this sorrowful rhyme.***
   rilke’s separation the unusual rilke and the usual rilke are stuck in their sameness the unusual rilke and the usual rilke would have stayed together the unusual rilke and the usual rilke would have to separate the unusual rilke and the usual rilke both knew it   rilke’s breath       1 rilke breathed the air the good air       2 rilke breathed without pause   rilke’s nose entrance and exit of the air it knew stench scent aroma handkerchief sniffles   rilke’s name rilke said he when asked for his name rilke one said when asked for his name or never heard of him   rilke, unrhymed rilke said he then he said cuke then quietly cloud   rilke’s boat taking a stroke sitting there sitting there taking a stroke  rilke’s drawer       1 he pulled out the drawer he put something in something was in there he pushed in the drawer       2 he pulled out the drawer something was in there he took something out he pushed in the drawer       3 he pulled out the drawer nothing was in there he put nothing in he left the drawer open   rilke’s chest       1 he lifted up the lid he put something in something was in there he shut the lid       2 he lifted up the lid something was in there he took something out he shut the lid       3 he lifted up the lid nothing was in there he put nothing in he left the chest open   rilke’s shoe rilke’s shoe was one of two each shoe of rilke’s was one of two rilke in shoes always wore two calf to calf stood rilke jutting up from his shoes   rilke’s window he opened the window stuck his head out pulled his head in closed it he opened the window morning air rushed in evening air night air he closed the window   rilke’s glass rilke took a glass filled it with water lifted it to his mouth drank   rilke’s hand rilke’s hand and rilke’s hand hanging by his side rilke’s hand in rilke’s hand the one in the other rilke’s hand in the hand of another greeting him rilke’s hand at rilke’s mouth sensing it there   rilke in conversation someone asks rilke answers rilke asks someone answers neither is very happy about it neither is very sad   rilke’s reward this now was his reward nobody was certain what he meant rilke wept   rilke’s contradiction and yet small and white and yet big and black and yet small and black and yet big and white and yet small and big and yet white and black and yet small and black and yet big and small and black   rilke’s eyes rilke opened his eyes everything was visible nothing was invisible rilke shut his eyes nothing was visible everything was invisible rilke opened his eyes nothing was invisible everything was visible rilke shut his eyes nothing was visible nothing was invisible   rilke’s weight rilke is being relieved of his weight so roughly does the earth raise her son   Translated from the German 
***
Let the relentless fist be kissed. The salt cannot be cooked; the past is overlooked. Full once they nibble, fleas quibble. Teeth in a hyena’s face always slide into place. No donkey can cart what weighs down your heart. Outside a man is respected; at home that man is neglected. The strangers weep and leave; family members grieve. Even half-blind men hope to see again. True words end; lies extend.    Translated from the Oromo
***
            iFor Laurita, my sister’s friend The moon is dead dead — it will come back to life in the spring when a south wind ruffles the brow of the poplars when our hearts yield their harvest of sighs when the roofs wear their grass hats The moon is dead dead — it will come back to life in the spring            iiFor Isabelita, my sister The evening sings a lullaby to the oranges My little sister sings “the earth is an orange” The moon weeping says “I want to be an orange” You can’t be — my dear —  even if you turn pink or a little bit lemon How sad!   Translated from the Spanish
***
In the branches of the laurel tree I saw two dark doves One was the sun and one the moon Little neighbors I said where is my grave —  In my tail said the sun On my throat said the moon And I who was walking with the land around my waist saw two snow eagles and a naked girl One was the other and the girl was none Little eagles I said where is my grave — In my tail said the sun On my throat said the moon In the branches of the laurel tree I saw two naked doves One was the other and both were none    Translated from the Spanish
***
Moon came to the forge in her petticoat of nard The boy looks and looks the boy looks at the Moon In the turbulent air Moon lifts up her arms showing — pure and sexy —  her beaten-tin breasts Run Moon run Moon Moon If the gypsies came white rings and white necklaces they would beat from your heart Boy will you let me dance —  when the gypsies come they’ll find you on the anvil with your little eyes shut Run Moon run Moon Moon I hear the horses’ hoofs Leave me boy! Don’t walk on my lane of white starch The horseman came beating the drum of the plains The boy at the forge has his little eyes shut Through the olive groves in bronze and in dreams here the gypsies come their heads riding high their eyelids hanging low How the night heron sings how it sings in the tree Moon crosses the sky with a boy by the hand At the forge the gypsies cry and then scream The wind watches watches the wind watches the Moon    Translated from the Spanish
***
It's just me throwing myself at you, romance as usual, us times us, not lust but moxibustion, a substance burning close to the body as possible withut risk of immolation. Nearness without contact causes numbness. Analgesia. Pins and needles. As the snugness of the surgeon's glove causes hand fatigue. At least this procedure requires no swag or goody bags, stuff bestowed upon the stars at their luxe functions. There's no dress code, though leg irons are always appropriate. And if anyone says what the hell are you wearing in Esperanto —Kion diable vi portas?— tell them anguish is the universal language. Stars turn to trainwrecks and my heart goes out admirers gush. Ground to a velvet! But never mind the downside, mon semblable, mon crush. Love is just the retaliation of light. It is so profligate, you know, so rich with rush.***
I come off a little bit ventilated but you must realize the material world is constantly crumbling under my eyes it's too much for the novel tongue I speak the glitter of pavement in my brainstem, you must accommodate the polytonal grimace of the set lips becoming a smile, and you must accept the thin section of arm advancing across your peripheries to grip you in pleasure, measuring feeling in your restraint We have lived through the most furious little chunk of history for this? that we must unburden ourselves on night roof air, presuming the poise and perks of champ pigeon teams planing the evening winds until, signaled from the roof with a flag we become American birds
***
Bungle is the password A slight matter of a deposit secures you the night's blank face on the large crude banknote I offer all the grease that's ever been on my palm as advice: Don't breathe in the lights of evening Moonshine hits the can bounces off and consumes the drapes I'm talking about here where we meet at the emergency water supply One man and one woman gets you one of each and some shadows A caress in the breeze A caress please so much? You can't even die without touching, you can't sweeten the fat street of faces                 without touch I don't retain the melody that set me, dressed as I am, in motion in marriage with myself It ain't no honeymoon to take off my breast and play it So it happens you notice me in my canary shorts and my crimson fez Twunk twunkity twunk My thumb piano, my  very open eyes
***
Happens this time in answer to indecency Lit by the yellow shop windows cast Unkind to you, that light You say, Sit, Ubu, sit, or Hey, I like your weave This avenue for instance Gateway to escapade You can see from the beginning to its end All-embracing greed Distracting appliqués of altruism Small pomme de terre Can you tell whose hand on the basinet and that does what for you Warmth all in the light Sight all in garage park hallway Morning's dusk on pause You stand body in profile What you don't fill in the doorway stays empty More than overcome I know you're there and unseal my lips  
***
My doctor's packed the place for years because he's known for making huge things sometimes disappear. His routine is predictable, effortless. Pick a number, any number: he's pointing to his framed pain scale. He pauses for effect. The six second sequenced faces are a kid—time-lapsed— at a magic show gone wrong. Onstage in Vegas once, the rare white tiger snapped. Inexplicable: my numbers creeping up each week. My doctor backs out quickly, as if dragged off in some beast's jaws.
***
and piles them on the driveway: femur, rib, jawbone with a few flat teeth attached, dozens of thin arced parts. This one for me—40 today. My birthday sent her to the woods and back. Chloe leans in on her knees, arranges the bones along a concrete seam that leads out to the street. In this next decade, she'll go: head off like today, take into her arms all she's curious about. Her line of bones makes an arrow; sun lights them like a sign. She'll go: undeniable as these bones, baffling as what animal they'd make. She's on all fours. The way I labored: some wild thing. She lays out arms and legs; the bones in line make a spine. My height. On the driveway lies my body—when it held her—inside out. The way she came: like bones. Gleaming, after living in my dark. Gleaming. So I can always find her.***
The healer said to me: it worked because you thought it would. I  let him palm my belly and chest; sometimes he shook and closed his eyes. Inches above my skin, he'd sweep his hands like smoothing sheets I couldn't see. I left our bed for years when I was sick. I understood our children then: bed meant missing out; bed felt like punishment. Now I sleep best at the edge—where the healer sat to rest. Your hand reches for my hip, holds on. Our children's mouths sigh open in the dark. They're not surprised: the healer touched me, and it worked. They've seen magicians— beneath the sheet that's pulled away, something's always gone. ***
Well yes, I said, my mother wears a dot. I know they said "third eye" in class, but it's not an eye eye, not like that. It's not some freak third eye that opens on your forehead like on some Chernobyl baby. What it means is, what it's showing is, there's this unseen eye, on the inside. And she's marking it. It's how the X that says where treasure's at is not the treasure, but as good as treasure.— All right. What I said wasn't half so measured. In fact, I didn't say a thing. Their laughter had made my mouth go dry. Lunch was after World History; that week was India—myths, caste system, suttee, all the Greatest Hits. The white kids I was sitting with were friends, at least as I defined a friend back then. So wait, said Nick, does your mom wear a dot? I nodded, and I caught a smirk on Todd— She wear it to the shower? And to bed?— whie Jesse sucked his chocolate milk and Brad was getting ready for another stab. I said, Hand me that ketchup packet there. And Nick said, What? I snatched it, twitched the tear, and squeezed a dollop on my thumb and worked circles till the red planet entered the house of war and on my forehead for the world to see my third eye burned those schoolboys in their seats, their flesh in little puddles underneath, pale pools where Nataraja cooled his feet.***
Off with the wristwatch, the Reeboks, the belt.              My laptop's in a bin. I dig out the keys from my jeans and do              my best Midwestern grin. At O'Hare, at Atlanta, at Dallas/Fort Worth,              it happens every trip, at LaGuardia, Logan, and Washington Dulles,              the customary strip is never enough for  a young brown male              whose name comes up at random. Lest the randomness of it be doubted, observe              how Myrtle's searched in tandem, how Doris's six-pack of Boost has been seized              and Ethel gets the wand. How polite of the screeners to sham paranoia              when what they really want is to pick out the swarthiest, scruffiest of us              and pat us top to toe, my fellow Ahmeds and my alien Alis,              Mohammed alias Mo— my buddies from med school, my doubles partners,              my dark unshaven brothers whose names overlap with the crazies and God fiends,              ourselves the goateed other.
***
Hell-raiser, razor-feathered risers, windhover over Peshawar, power's joystick-blithe thousand-mile scythe, proxy executioner's proxy ax pinged by a proxy server, winged victory, pilot cipher unburdened by aught but fuel and bombs, fool of God, savage idiot savant sucking your benumbed trigger-finger gamer's thumb  
***
Richer than mother's milk is half-and-half. Friends of two minds, redouble your craft. Our shelves our hives, our selves a royal jelly, may we at Benares and Boston, Philly and Delhi collect our birthright nectar. No swarm our own, we must be industrious, both queen and drone. Being two beings requires a rage for rigor, rewritable memory, hybrid vigor. English herself is a crossbred mother mutt, primly promiscuous and hot to rut. Oneness? Pure chimera. Splendor is spliced. Make your halves into something twice your size, your tongue a hyphen joining nation to nation. Recombine, become a thing of your own creation, a many-minded mongrel, the line's renewal, self-made and twofold, soul and dual.  
***
And where my organ of veneration should be— wormwood and gall. Grudge sliver. Wailbone, iron, bitters. I mean to say the miniature waterfalls have all dried up in this miniature place where day is duty cubed, time is time on task and every mind optimized for compliance. Time to delint my black denim traveling stuff. The flourescent major highlighter has dimmed to minor. I'm so dying I wrote when I meant to write so tired. And when I sleep I dream only that I'm sleeping. Please see my black stuff's dusted off. Night has no dilution anxieties, but only the infinites are happy: Math. Time. Everything happy goes to many decimal places while flesh passes through gradations of glory. I visualized it, the nurse said of the bedsore. Everything exists at the courtesy of everything else. Please see that my grave is kept clean. Beloveds, finite things in which the infinite endangered itself, excarnate to memory and the divine substance has limited liability. You're kind, I tell the infinite. Too kind.
***
My bones tied up with his bones at night, him falling asleep in my arm after wrasslin me, calling it love in some kind of low whisper no dog would believe. I know his every smell, every way the littlest corner of him be stinkin underneath me, on top of me, while our children snore in the corner, then he creep out the way he creep in, before the cock crow at the sun. In daylight he act like we strangers, on the edge of the field, his little tan children of mine turning brown, playing more than working cause they his children, Missy look over at me while I look  over at her, both of us got some kind of papers on this same man that say he own both of us, the man who owes us even we he die cause the Bible say you gotta look after the widow. But when he die it will be cause Missy and me locked eyes many days and hated him like one wronged woman made out of two, him standing up there on the porch studyin everything— his eyes lit up like he the Lord of all creation. hush now, night wind on my skin, hush now bird lost in trees, hush now, hungry moon  
***
It is Monday, I am twelve years old, summer still feel like summer to me...                                            Ernest Green My elementary school principal was white I only had one white teacher, she was named after the juice the astronauts took into space, Tang, I got some Tang at home...did you hear about the little girls who got killed while we was in Sunday School yesterday?                                           Elizabeth Eckford I live in Baltimore and so do you, your people the raw and stinky crew, my daddy a big shot on the Avenue your daddy can't buy a pair of shoes...                                           Jefferson Thomas One little girl was named Addie Mae, just liek my aunt from South Carolina, and when I come home from church everybody was cryin about the news from Alabama...I know Alabama Alabama was on the math test today—                              If you going 65 miles an hour leaving                              Richmond near where my cousin live                              and you drive for twelve hours straight                              will get you to Alabama? hell no, cause                              Alabama in hell ...                                           Terrance Roberts The bus is hot, the white neighborhood full of angry faces just two miles from where we live, angry faces I see at night when I look out the window and wonder why I have to sit next to white children to be smart...I was smart all the time, my mama told me so when I did things the right way, extra things, good things, smart is knowin when somethin's missing...                                           Carlotta Walls LaNier I like Malcom X because he looks like me when I am so mad I can't stand myself, when my cousins take my model car shelf down, break up my cats and then dare me to fight, when I have to walk from the white school home through the white neighborhood when I miss the bus or when I get a beatin for what my friend did and he get a beatin, too, but mine hurt more because he did it, not me, so I like Malcom X. He so mean, Mr. Green, he so mean...you got to be mean in Chicago...                                           Minnijean Brown When I was fourteen a boy kissed me when we were walking to the movies, he sneaked me, and I tried not to smile because kissing is a sin and all the while I was so full of hallelujah on the inside, on the way to the movies we go to now because somebody made a way somehow, standing in lines with protest signs, dogs barking all around, so I make sure I sound educated when Henry sneaks to kiss me on the way to the movies...we have all kinds of movies in Philadelphia...                                           Gloria Ray Karlmark New York is faster than yesterday, been here and gone before you remember it ain't here no more, we go downtown in the middle of tomorrow when it still be today, New York is faster than yesterday, I got a quarter for your ten dollar bill, give it to me I'll pay your cleaners bill because New York is faster than yesterday, and a high school diploma is all a genius like me will ever need in a city where a thrill is more to me if you will believe me...and believe me you will...                                           Thelma Mothershed What a word will do, my momma used to say at night when her work was done, rearing back in that chair of hers with the stuffin fallin out of the arms, what a word will do when you know what words are for, she would say, layin her head back, closing her eyes and settling down inside some dream. She never told us her dreams when we asked her, she just said we would know when the moon turned over three times and ghosts rose up out of the sea. Mama was half out of this world, in California we all the way in it...                                           Melba Patillo Beals               Little Rock Nine,               Shaking the line               Between white no               And black oh yes,               I'll walk all over               What is mine, thanks               To Little Rock Nine.    
***
Deer do not tremble, I know this. My bone and sinew twisted into fallow slenderness and the tibia twig thin. Four rods finished with a cloven hoof planted on rotting leaf mould: gloomy weight of the gold altar. The poet's words are wind-blown apples. Plucked lute strings vibrate to silence as I watch Caesar with my velvet eyes,   long ears poised to absorb the rush of animal clamour that is hushed in the shells of human skulls. Despite the blood threat of power my doe body would not spring away — no flick of spotted fur into shadow.
***
Woman was made to serve and obey man, Man must obey God. Wife: man can command. A natural order, God's ordained plan; A woman must bow down to her husband.        England needs an heir so I must marry       But yet I prevaricate and tarry.***
I am Queen and I shall do my utmost to fulfil my duty towards my country.Duty is a slapped mouth, sewn shut with cat-gut. To my dear, loyal subjects who are assembled to show their good humour and excessive loyalty.Apes, hyenas, jackdaws: how they screech and caw. How proud I felt to be the Queen of such a Nation, the Crown being placed on my head, so gently.But such a weight! Monstrous as a beached whale. It was, I remember, a most beautiful, impressive moment. My robes draped on the chair beautifully.White body full of blood, bruises that bleed. Nothing was done without his loving advice and help, darling Albert was the other part of me.FIlled with life after life after life after life after life. The only ray of comfort I get for a moment is in the firm conviction and certainty.I remember the chloroform. So blissfully empty of voices. of his nearness, his undying love and of our eternal reunion. Impatiently I wait and I do my damn duty.***
In today's correspondence a poetry book detailing the lives of British Queens— with a note enclosed and a question: what does it mean to be a Queen? I could reply and say— this precious stone set in a silver sea: a symbol, like a banner, for mens' love. But these are not my words. I could reply and say— glorying in the glories of my people, sorrowing with the sorrows of the lowest. But these are not my words. I could declare— that each Queen is tissue paper thin, transluscent but combined, are my flesh. But I will not solidify my words, instead I will command my secretary to write, with many kind thanks for the little book etc, but to say my thoughts on Queenship can only be ascertained by my actions.***
To say how much I've missed you, I offer this,   at most mist, at least assorted letters, lists, numbers I insist tell stories. I kissed you last, Dad, in the casket in which you passed on, to some next place, but last listened for your voice last night, these long years after, will listen next when next oppressed by blue-gray, as I am now, as I, thus lost, am always by your absence.
***
The barstool's capacious, then ever more enclosed, with every beer, as evening erodes. A few capricious tourists off the cozy track propose unbeaten toasts. He'll soon be going back. Mannequin musicians play mandolins or thumb pianos, bleat out a reggae air on ragged banjos. The booths patter with the local lingo. Smattered English polishes the windows. An amble to the john, the mirror's random crack. The urinal's askew. He'll soon be going back. The minimal solicitudes of seven-minute flirts: blurted-out soliloquies, well-trained parting words. Insert pejorative for natives here, before a sputtered call for one more beer. Dusty carnations; carnival bric-a-brac— long-faded revaltions. He'll soon be going back.
***
The chickens are back in their coop. The kids are out on the town. It's here in one fell swoop.                 It's sundown. You've heard them say it before. The rumour's been going around. You're heading straight for the door.                 It's sundown.                 You've forgotten what you said.                 All that matters is here and now                 No one's getting you to bed,                 even though it's sundown. The trucks roll by on the highway. You want to follow that sound. You want to have your say                at sundown. The dusk turns into dark. You walk away with a frown. You're the only one in the park                past sundown.                Here's where the children played,                but they're not here right now.                You don't want to end your day,                even though it's sundown.  
***
He stood up suddenly and threw himself and his grey canvas sack to the bus's floor, then, clutching the sack's edges, he struck the floor with it again, four or five times, then stopped. No one moved, everyone had moved for a moment, away from him as he had struck the floor. He sat looking at the contents of the bag, now strewn all over. Cassetts, broken cassette cases, assorted papers, and pieces of his old cassette recorder. He sat quite still for a moment. Whatever had been happening wasn't happening anymore. Nothing continued to happen, then something began to happen again. He began to pick up his things, put them into the sack. No one moved. They all looked at him, or they all tried not to look at him. He put his things into the sack with steadily increasing speed.  
***
1 Our last night in the house was not our last.With two cats in the yard. Our movers took the furniture in the morning. A country where they turned back time.***
Moonpoison, mullock of sacrifice, Suffuses the veins of the eyes Till the retina, mooncoloured, Sees the sideways motion of the cretin crab Hued thus like a tortoise askew in the glaucous moonscape A flat hot boulder it Lividly in the midst of the Doldrums Sidles The lunatic unable to bear the silent course of constellations Mad and stark naked Sidles The obol on an eyeball of a man dead from elphantiasis Sidles All three across heaven with a rocking motion. The Doldrums: 'region of calms and light baffling winds near Equator.' But the calms are rare The winds baffling but not light And the drunken boats belonging to the Crab Club Rock hot and naked to the dunning of the moon All in the pallescent Sargasso weed And windbound, seeking distraction by the light of deliverance For What are we but the excrement of non-existent noon?      (Truth like starlight crookedly) What are we all but 'burial grounds abhorred by the moon'? And did the Maoris die of measles? So do we. But there is no snow here, nor lilies. The night is glutinous In a broad hearth crisscross thorn clumps Smoulder: distant fireback of copse Throws back silence: glassen ashes gleam in pond The constellations which have stopped working (?) Shimmer. No dead leaf jumps. On edge of lawn a glowworm Hangs out its state-recognized torchlamp Blocks of flowers gape dumb as windows with blinds drawn And in the centre the rugate trees Though seeming as if they go up in smoke Are held like cardboard where they are. Bluehot it is queer fuel to make the moon move. Agesias said: 'Nero was an artist because he murdered his mother Sensibility (subliminal) is of more importance than moral obligation           (prandial).'      But Agesias paints cottages in watercolours and fears his own mother. Barbarieus said: 'I am passionately in love with Gito who spurns me for            Praxinoê'      But until he saw them together he was merely disturbed by Gito's                eyelashes. Galônus said: 'The subsequent shrivelling of an orchid doesn't alter the          value of its beauty.' Decanus said: 'Joy in nothing. Either dies joy or what produced it.'      But Galônus is attractive to women, Decanus obese, poor, obtuse. Epinondas said: 'I have been a liar, now no longer so.' Zeuxias said: 'What I have always been, I shall remain, a fool."      Is it better to be self-deceived or lazy? Epator was drunk for two days: Theodorus traced his disease to college,           Iphogenês saw God and died, And so down the Alphabet, ate, and the Persian, With variegated gutterals and sibilants, the Gaelic with dipthongs and          tripthongs, Choctaw with three different clicks Each letter is somebody But the Crab is nobody Nobody Nobody A ganglion of neurotic imitations Composed of each letter in turn Jointed by conflicts he does not want A word that never existed with a sense nobody can understand. Suffering for the sins his father refuse to commit He sits and thinks about the twiddling toes of Gunerita A boy-girl or girl-boy of an average pulchritude Haunted by phantoms of his female self Whom he has never seen but composed himself, thus:      Breasts of Augustina brains of Beatrice      Arms of Capucine on the motherliness of Dorothea      Eyes of Evelyn in the brow of Francesca      Fragrance of Gretchen with the understanding of Helen This he desires, but despises: Bhah! Always sideways, crabs walk. Either he is not fit for this world Or this world not fit for him. But which? After all this pain of development is there neither interval nor reward? They lured him with promises, Now it has all slipped sideways What is the good, I ask you, of going into a melting-pot If fated to melt again after getting out of it? The answers are: He is not out of it Determined to budge not from yon slippery rock Not a yard, no, not an inch, no, nor a barleycorn's breadth For chance is not blind but unimpedable And we call it blind because Since we frustrate it only by chance We prefer to shut our own eyes. The crab however crawls on. He must therefore be a crab subnormal. One day, one of his foreclaws, assembled as usual by many men, Being longer than the other, turns and pinches his tentacles With the other he pinches the persons that assembled the long one Next day the short one, equally alien, is the longer And the process is reversed. In mass production one hand never knows The evil the other is inspiring it to do This is a heretic even to the faiths he fails to believe So worthless, awkward, unintelligible, The crab crawls on. He has sufferd because he was ugly Let him be cruel now that he is attractive Caring not whether he fructifies cruelty or is merely hard on self. We trap our goldfinch trapping out souls therewinged Sacrifice our mad gods to the madder gods: We hymn the two sons of Leda and Zeus Aegis-bearer We don't. We drink and drivel. My      poor Catullus, do stop being such a      fool. Admit that lost which as you watch is      gone. O, once the days shone very bright for      you, when where that girl you loved so (as no      other will be) called, you came and came. And      then and there were odd things done and many      which you wanted and she didn't not want.      Yes indeed the days shone very bright for      you. But now she doesn't want it.                                                                   Don't you either,       booby. Don't keep chasing her. Don't live in       misery, carry on, be firm, be hardened.       Goodbye, girl: Catullus is quite hardened,       doesn't want you, doesn't ask, if you're not       keen—though sorry you'll be to be not asked.       Yes, poor sinner . . . what is left in life for       you? Who'll now go with you? Who'll be attracted?       Whom'll you love now? Whom say you belong to?       Whom'll you now kiss? Whose lips'll you nibble?      —Now you, Catullus! you've decided to be hardened. How can I be hardened when the whole world is fluid? O Aphroditê Pandêmos, your badgers rolling in the moonlit corn Corn blue-bloom-covered carpeting the wind Wind humming like distant rooks Distant rooks busy like factory whirring metal Whirring metallic starlings bizarre like cogwheels missing teeth These last grinning like the backs of old motor cars Old motor cars smelling of tragomaschality Tragomaschality denoting the triumph of self over civilization Civilization being relative our to Greek                            Greek to Persian                            Persian to Chinese Chinese politely making borborygms to show satisfaction Satisfaction a matter of capacity Capacity not significance: otherwise with an epigram Epigrams—poems with a strabismus Strabismus being as common spiritually as optically the moon The moon tramping regular steps like a policeman past the houses of the            Zodiac And the Zodiac itself, whirling and flaming sideways***
If Black History Month is not viable then wind does not carry the seeds and drop them on fertile ground rain does not dampen the land and encourage the seeds to root sun does not warm the earth and kiss the seedlings and tell them plain: You’re As Good As Anybody Else You’ve Got A Place Here, Too
***
1. TodayToday, this moment, speechlessly in pain,He fights the terror of being poured out,The fall into darkness unquenchably longSo that even as he hurtles he keeps holdingBack like a dam the flood overtops—but nothing nowCan stop that surge, already he swirlsTo the source of Voices, the many throats inside the oneThroat, each swallowing the unstoppable flood ...And as if that, all along, were what he'd wanted,He hears the Voices begin to die downThe way a marsh in spring pulsing and shrillingSunup to sundown falls gradually still—Unappeasable, the silence that will followWhen his every last drop has been poured out.          2. CountdownIn your hospital bed, the plastic mask acrossYour face siphoning air into your lungs,You lie helpless as an astronautBlasting into space: Eyes obliviousTo ours, your body's fevered presenceShimmers like the phantom heat that will trailUp the pipe of the crematory oven:How distant we will seem afterSuch intensity ... We drift in your stareLike the dust stirred by the cow your parentsGave you as a boy to teach responsibility.Already you are space immeasurableBy your slide rule, your graphs that plottedPayload, liftoff, escape velocity.          3. PrayerIn the house of the dead I pace the halls:The walls, collapsing, stretch away in desertOr flatten into horizonless ocean.I step outside, the door clicking shutComforting in its finality ...Now I see the house as if I looked downFrom far off mountains, and saw you crouching inThe sun-scoured yard, eyes keenly focused,Pupils narrowing to a cat's green slits:I can't look you in the face, you see onlyThe openness of sky rising above mountains.(Only after the world had emptiedYou and filled you with its opennessWill I feel the love I pray to feel?)          4. The Goda dream A warming pulsing flood like blood surging throughVeins, and now the god stirs in my handsDull as stone in this gravity-less Nowhere.Sensation shivering through me, deliberate and sure,I cradle you, I sponge you cleanAs if you were my son, the emptiness youDrink like heavy black milk erasingYour wrinkles and gouged lines of pain.The god bends me to the work, my fingers drivenBy the god, blinded by the god'sNeutrality, until I pull apart the threadsIn this place the god commands:Face wholly unwoven, without heart, mind, youare nothing in my hands but my hands moving.          5. His StareAbsently there in a moment of pure beingHe sits in his chair, eyes locked, staring:The air's transparence gains solidityFrom his looking; while his emaciated features,The way his flesh sags from sharpening cheekbones,Make the summer air weigh like marble on the harsh greenOf the trees he is too weak to prune.And yet the contemplative distance he is sealed inProjects with ferocious purpose the will of his bodyTo withdraw into this eerily removed contemplationLike one who has heard a tuning fork ringingAnd enters and becomes each spectral vibration;So utterly absorbed that love is a distraction; evenThe world, its barest colors, bleeding away before that stare.          6. The CurrentThe numbing current of the DemorolSweeps him out to sea where the secret nightHe lives in slowly begins to darken,His daytime routine of watching his blood cycleThrough the tubes of a machine shadowed by blacknessBlinding as an underwater cave. AlreadyHe filters the dark water through gills alignedTo strain that element he more and more resembles:Like walls of water held in miraculousSuspension, the moment of his death looms impartiallyAbove him, my hands holding his tighteningIts grip even as his hand loosens ...As if my hand could lead him past that undulatingWeight towering above us out of sight.          7. The RehearsalI lead you back, your Orpheus, until youStand inhaling, on the topmost stair,The rank rich air of breathing flesh—But like fumes rising from earth's molten coreThe voices of the dead reach out to you,Your whispering parents, dead for forty years,Entreating me to turn—and so ITurn, as must you: Your footsteps die,You dwindle, blur into unfillableSpace echoing like the dark of a cathedral ...But there is no dark, no stair, no Orpheus—Only this voice rehearsing breathBy breath in words you'll never read theseLines stolen from your death.
***
A crown of handmade nails, as though  there were a house here once, burned,  where we’ve gardened for fifteen years;  the ceramic top of an ancient fuse;  this spring the tiny head of a plastic doll—  not much compared to what they find  in England, where every now and then  a coin of the Roman emperors, Severus  or Constantius, works its way up, but  something, as though nothing we’ve  ever touched wants to stay in the earth,  the patient artifacts waiting, having been lost  or cast away, as though they couldn’t bear  the parting, or because they are the only  messengers from lives that were important once,  waiting for the power of the frost  to move them to the mercy of our hands.
***
What she is waiting for never arrivesor arrives so slowly she can't see it:      Like the river      bluing silverand wearing minutely deeper into its channel,the flow hardens to carved stone as she fidgets      beneath the whirling fan      impatient for the trainthat rocks us above the water to arrive:Her sisters and brothers gone, she ventures alone      through sunlight      and moonlightweaving shadowy faces across the peeling walls...—Speeding toward her, is it you and me she spies      in the trembling train      windows while the enginehauls us down rails that swerve under wheelsrolling through her brain? Faces burn      through dirty glass,      smears of lips and eyesdissolve to spots of darkness swarming betweenher eyes so that swaying apartment towers      crumble as her nostrils      prickle from the landfill'sammonia that hangs above the stacked, crushed cars.The rails that take us to her pass boxcar after boxcar      like the successive selves we are      as she dreams us coming closer,switching track to track: Now the super unboltsher door as she calls: “Oh is it really you?”      —the wheel's rolling      through her head bringingus face to face with raveled bandages, crutchesleaned in dusty corners, terraced mountains of      yellowing newspaper.      Framed above her chaira picture of a prairie sprawls round a covered wagonand the horse she rode as a girl, her eyes      fading points of light...      Again she calls outabove the train's approaching rumble: “Is it you at last?”My eyes have got so bad peoples’ faces      are all blurry...Now      tell me, is it really you?”But already the rails are switching, bearingour waving hands away at the speed of thought      over the stony waters that      ceaselessly pour out.
***
Across the road from where we napunder a dead elm dazzles the meadowwhere the partisans strung the traitors up,the meadow which their dangling shadows stain.Belly up in vines a blasted tankrusts flake by flake to lichened scrap ironwhile horseflies haranguethe rippling green, Julya limbo of quavering yellow...We wake to cattle lowing at dawn,grass overgrowing summer—so like usin love each hour with the noonday sunthat neither toils nor spins, its brightnesshovering, blinding us...What would the dead say if they could see us,lounging, talking, peering through bramblesat cemetery photographs sunk beneaththe undertow of milkweed shadows,death dates smoothing back into the stone?I think of Goya’s demon, old man fleshhanging from his bones, long teeth bared inan ass’s grin as he scrawls on a schoolboy’sslate, What more can be done? Nothing... while behind him a noose etched clean asthe moon rises through the inkblotspiraling back into the hanged man’s mouthas if blackness poured from his throat:“When will you tire of us bogeymen,caricatures of your father’s war,our crimes half-forgotten, unforgiven?All future blotted out when they hauled usfrom our beds, our minds went deadto everything but fear: Nightshirtssoaked in snowlight’s pall, we hunched in mud, each steploud, too loud beside the farmhouse wall,the seconds teetering till we drop...What our betrayals were we knowwith a knowledge intimate beyond revenge,history the needle’s eye you can’t squeeze through.The partisans cut us down, heaped usin a mass grave our relatives dug up: Yes,there were tears—even for us...Now, like aliens from space on your TV shows,we ravel into mist, surroundingyou the moment your eyes close...Our pupils search out yours from behindthe mirror with your father’s stares,fathers and sons melding in one mind—but who are you to call us traitors, an outsiderjudging through the smoke-haze of home:Each blow exact, our own neighborsbeat us till the blood ran, beat us blackand blue...Even now, would they dare take us back,older, wiser, necks broken by the yoke?Moving in time as to a dance we buzzand swarm across the meadow, dissolvingand glinting like fireflies in the hedge,blown like milkweed in the moon’s wall eye.But under your lids, you see us locked in cold,shattered wheatstraw flecked in ice:Chill as the night air on your sunburned neckour eyes like X rays pierce the frost,stalking every step the living take.”
***
I I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory, in the unleavened garden disgorged the lies and scared away with a stick a snake. What made me cover that which I could not have? I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs, I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory. Even the falling leaves gesture their renunciation. I disgorge the lies and abhor the serpent’s hiss. I remember seasons, things I bring from far away, and grieve. I walk in catacombs. In gardens now, by the stone walls, sunlight closes, the falling leaves gesture their renunciation. I remember being in a field touching a man’s body. I remember seasons, things I bring from far away and things that hold their breath for shame. His skin was soft as a girl’s and he closed his eyes. I placed apple petals on his eyelids; we were lying in a field and I touched his body. Then there were clouds, an uncanny silence, as when in a green place the air holds its breath for shame. What made me covet what I could not have? Ill with the power and glory, a thrashing in my chest, I remember the unleavened gardens, petals falling singly, the yellow snake disgorging lies. II I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs. I’ve felt undeserving. I’ve made myself ill with the glory, power and glory-- a thrashing in my rib cage. I’ve gone into the unleavened spring garden, disgorged the lies, and scared away with a stick a snake. I’ve grieved and walked in catacombs. What made me cover that which I could not have? I’ve felt undeserving. In this bright land that changes from yellow to green and back to yellow, I remember seasons, things I bring with me from far away and things that hold their breath as if for shame. I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory. I’ve gone into the unleavened garden and startled a yellow snake disgorging lies. A thrashing in my rib cage. What made me cover what I could not have? I remember   seasons. Things that hold their breath for shame. Things I bring with me from far away. III I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory. I’ve made myself ill with the power and glory.
***
It was dusk, the light hesitating and a murmer in the wind, when the deer, exhausted, turned to look at me, an arrow in its side. Though I pity dreamers, taking a thread and weaving it upon the loom of Self—the secret, gaudy, wonderful new cloth—, I will tell the end of the story. His shoulder was torn, the joint held by one sinew, which I severed with the blade of the arrow, so when he ran there were no impediments. The black dogs that followed were swifter, their barking ancient, despicable. As he fell, his chest turned to breastplate, his one powerful arm covered with pagan signs. Nearly stupid in my waiting for what would happen next, each breath propelling me and him toward dust, I woke, the sheets soaked, heart fluttering—: When death comes into the sleeping room as through a tiny hole, like a rent in the Covenant, it hurts.
***
The dogs eat hoof slivers and lie under the porch. A strand of human hair hangs strangely from a fruit tree like a cry in the throat. The sky is clay for the child who is past being tired, who wanders in waist-deep grasses. Gnats rise in a vapor, in a long mounting whine around her forehead and ears. The sun is an indistinct moon. Frail sticks of grass poke her ankles, and a wet froth of spiders touches her legs like wet fingers. The musk and smell of air are as hot as the savory terrible exhales from a tired horse. The parents are sleeping all afternoon, and no one explains the long uneasy afternoons. She hears their combined breathing and swallowing salivas, and sees their sides rising and falling like the sides of horses in the hot pasture. At evening a breeze dries and crumbles the sky and the clouds float like undershirts and cotton dresses on a clothesline. Horses rock to their feet and race or graze. Parents open their shutters and call the lonely, happy child home. The child who hates silences talks and talks of cicadas and the manes of horses.
***
As a child I parleyed with animals, stuffed and real. Making my kitten pilot of a boot, I guided from one end of a string the dizzy flight and collapse. I was fearful of people as well as things, and my faithful toy shepherd with his painted face sat by me on the bed in the gloom. I was disdainful of dolls as weak people. In the favorite story I told myself my parents were made over into fair-limbed, brave angels who smiled into their god’s eyes when summoned. I was benevolent, afraid to let go of this image at night because I couldn’t hide deep enough under the covers to be overlooked by death, the angel bending over me who had been wronged. I read histories of queens, regal and barbarian, whose leopard’s eyes restrained man or wild beast. I rambled along tidal rivers and in the marshes where the green-golden grasses dazzled the sun, and felt the ache of sea-air in my lungs. I saw water spume near Atlantic cliffs. I examined lichen. I saw great light drown darkness. Then at thirteen I lay in the bleak bed before sleep and heard the pleadings and the murderous kisses; and burned, like a bear his fat, my soul. I quaked at the sound of my voice whispering, No, or turned my face to the wall and wept salt onto my knuckles. In the serene light of sun-up, before sparrows tumbled up from the earth, whispering and singing, and the exquisite sea and sky mobilized their heavy, blue currents, I was consoled. I walked through beauty without knowing why and told no one, wanting nothing else to touch me and never to move anyone in any way. I hid away from the house and learned the dark was not a dream but could show the pale gravel of a real driveway. I saw for the first time later the new moon and the full moon in one piece. I no longer feared the night, night like a bear at ease in his wide habitat. In the greatness of such space I said, This is me.
***
Into the changes of autumn brush the doe walked, and the hide, head, and ears were the tinsel browns. They made her. I could not see her. She reappeared, stuffed with apples, and I shot her. Into the pines she ran, and I ran after. I might have lost her, seeing no sign of blood or scuffle, but felt myself part of the woods, a woman with a doe’s ears, and heard her dying, counted her last breaths like a song of dying, and found her dying. I shot her again because her lungs rattled like castanets, then poked her with the gun barrel because her eyes were dusty and unreal. I opened her belly and pushed the insides like rotted fruit into a rabbit hole, skinned her, broke her leg joints under my knee, took the meat, smelled the half-digested smell that was herself. Ah, I closed her eyes. I left her refolded in some briars with the last sun on her head like a benediction, head tilted on its axis of neck and barren bone; head bent wordless over a death, though I heard the night wind blowing through her fur, heard riot in the emptied head.
***
I rubbed wax crayon against blowing paper. From the rock face footed a dancer white through red.     My family gave me over     to it, gone for the river. Were I a peasant harvesting grapes near Beaune in the last century, even, I might have dreamed     a saint lifting off for Arles,     Les Saintes Maries de la Mer, and knowing about cannon in that long peace, might have been troubled therefore that my flier     hauled a magnum of the best     and bloodied the west sky with it and vanished. My fisting that loose sheet in place was secretarial, not visionary!     Already in that decade     small tribes entered the void like windows on a skyscraper when the bent janitor makes his way. But those flick back on     each night, costly difference.     It is not only portents in dream or flapping images of the gone or the soon-to-be-going or the tremblingly poised     that catch like undertow     the foot in tide-rip toeing down the singing or remembered beach. We study populations in the forests,     we hold the paper flat,     mark, note, warn—the dictated prophecies do their work, we do some work— cut horn from rhinos so they won’t be poached.     But, to go on from there,     one needs to stand in the doorway some evening and feel the air as if it were fire pulling illusionlessly, letting the draw     of one fact heat its chain     of links, such as, Japan clear-cutting forests in Siberia where tigers not already harvested     lope their dwindling range,     two hundred as the hinge for their growled arc of existence, bones of the others ground to powders for old men’s potencies.     One needs to feel the tug     of the draft on skin, the drag of process utterly anciently itself. Faster, now, the pull is from birth through dwelling through     dissolution, along lines     streaming through us, ageless winds.
***
An apple paring curled from the knife wetly     down my thumb— and what I had failed to do rightly touching that life     next to mine, wearing late afternoon’s numb luminosity, impaled me.     A hunter knee-deep in salt marsh, whom Anton Chekov might have set there and then left,     back to doctoring, or choked off as too dark, wanton,     met the steep flailing of teal, trailed their shrill lift, but stood only, hearing them.     Pouring the last tea of an evening, dark amber alive, breathing in quintessence     of India, I felt limber bark sheathing the shrub of my life’s tree with root good, but dense, dark, local, raw there,     and so in dark woke, the seeing doctor, two simple profiles of linked characters     in his air, cruel, good, a pair ample, true across that split yoke, true to its splayed force— simple so rare, though.
***
At a bus stop in Arles a fellow wounded in the Last War winced into sunlight: Oui, they are beating the drums against les juifs again, and the Moors. France is an old man!***
Faded and baked here to a tawny grit, spills of blood and seed from humanity called from it for its crimes against mute earth gully in footpaths, dribble down to the sea, payment now and forever drawn from birth through flesh’s sunny darkness. Light yeasts in it. And if I find the slope to crumbled temples of that light’s god dragging at me through heat, shallow degrees of slant up to remnant stone, then something more than burnt air, or the repeat of weight known as time, pulls heavily in this zone, something the bone brings, terrible through simple. Phoibos, slayer at distances with shock, sower of plague and arrower of healing, tension of bright-dark beyond spanning, love will not quite cast out evil while revealing your fissionables. The raven was your dove. Heavy isotopes hum with crickets in rock. Neither woman nor man, my driver laughed when his lights torched writhings down the far shoulder, cross-dresser in the night beyond Naples, huge, sinuous, crooning as we shot past. Life seems older in its variant forms, drawn by the centrifuge to the rim and swinging, swayed in time’s dream uncalfed. For the vast thrower, shafter of quivering force, sex was filigree in whoever served. Pythoness, yes, wombed keeper of those coils in the wet cellar where tongue darted and swerved. But her own throat when it swelled with voice knew toils past a man’s strength, torqued bulging from the source. And that young man fitted with bone and thong and membrane from his withers by his father the maze molder, when he climbed into flame itself in the high nucleus, dripped as slather down the sky’s maw. Union there, with an aim at the center, crisped on a central soundless gong, sizzling from his overreach extended back on itself and down, the soundless hurry of the sea far below minutely riven, trembling in place, diamonds in blue slurry nowhere disturbed yet flecking everywhere, driven— all this boy’s cry endlessly thin, suspended. The sybil when at last her throat disgorged its burdens rumbled like a pawing bull, or the bull-fiend on Krete, and shrilly warbled. Birds ride the bull’s hump in stone graphs, that full barbarity at poise piercing now the garbled clang of Ikaros, over us tensile and forged. This is the crumbling whistle of shells and frags in their close arc. Philosophy gets precise when it turns practical. This in our background whir. Archimedes, old Fermi in your eyes, naked, ecstatic with theorems that assure conclusion, your city falls, your hacked flesh sags. There was a sprig which, if you bore it in hand on landing here, your pilot drowned and your herald crushed in the surf, would bend and seem to listen— there was a branch that trailed her voice through imperiled corridors to throats of the dead, and glistened, then brought you back to your breath near shining sand. And there was pelt from the solar scavenger, its blond mane tossing with your workings, turning catastrophe to triumph, lion crud strewn now on waves, coat of the charger burning obsidian cobalt platinum and mud in craters of the shaker and avenger. Eroded skull of this squat promontory, nubbled shrine over cave by surf hypnotized before deeps enameled with fire’s mosaic, you are the structure lucid though pulverized behind the logics, and the omens prosaic in their spelling out, and the blaze of story. Give me your light! I am the darkened thing seeking it. Give me your fire and your cry! But hood me from sulfurs she inhaled when she twisted over the fissure, give me your hand from the sky we have fallen into. Give, yes, what you insisted she utter, rasped uncoilings of your spring! And then release me to the animal shy of speech yet steady in ecstasies, your cousin the outsider’s gaze through life, the drink of it down, and finally mind as frieze eternally in metamorphic strife released, sea stone and cloud infinitely small. And there the migrant and his wanderers may find the new land, and their future wars may roll, exhausted in hissing foam, to sink over the fish spines, and the blunderers of fulfillment stare at samsaric wink of ocean, stare and find sleep that dissolves the curse.
***
You used to be able to flag a ride in this country.  Impossible now—everyone is afraid    of strangers.   Well, there was fear then too,  and it was mutual: drivers versus hitchhikers.  And we rode without seat belts,  insurance or beliefs.  People  would see me far ahead on a hill like a seedling,  watch me grow in the windshield  and not know they were going to stop until  they got right up to me.  Maybe they wanted  company or thought I’d give them  some excitement.  It was the age  of impulse, of lonesome knee jerks.  An old woman  stopped, blew smoke in my face  and after I was already in her car she asked me  if I wanted a ride.  I’m telling you.  Late one night a construction boss pulled over.  One of his crew had been hit  by the mob, he said as he drove, distraught  and needing to talk to someone.  We rode around for a long time.  He said, I never wore a gun to a funeral before,  but they’ve gotta be after me too.  Then he looked at me and patted the bulge  in his coat.  Don’t worry, he said, you’re safe.
***
A woman was fighting a tree. The tree had come to rage at the woman’s attack, breaking free from its earth it waddled at her with its great root feet.          Goddamn these sentiencies, roared the tree with birds shrieking in its branches.          Look out, you’ll fall on me, you bastard, screamed the woman as she hit at the tree.          The tree whisked and whisked with its leafy branches.          The woman kicked and bit screaming, kill me kill me or I’ll kill you!          Her husband seeing the commotion came running crying, what tree has lost patience?          The ax the ax, damnfool, the ax, she screamed.          Oh no, roared the tree dragging its long roots rhythmically limping like a sea lion towards her husband.          But oughtn’t we to talk about this? cried her husband.          But oughtn’t we to talk about this, mimicked his wife.          But what is this all about? he cried.          When you see me killing something you should reason that it will want to kill me back, she screamed.          But before her husband could decide what next action to perform the tree had killed both the wife and her husband.          Before the woman died she screamed, now do you see?          He said, what...? And then he died.
***
Dear Miss, First of all I want to say that I have enjoyed the imaginary possibility, built of course on the fact that such possibility does exist in nature: I have seen the birds and other forms of nonhumanity occur in such postures that must be with men and women....I have imagined myself in such postures with you, where flight was discouraged only by the inherent possibility of the firm horizontal...          As men give vast lands to little papers with line and color, I have imagined more on the surface of your body, giving all the universe in this model....          Yet, I must be curious about your breasts...curious...hungry is the word, to see, to touch, to taste....I am curious as to how your hands undress your body.          I am interested in your mind: will you undress in front of me? Will you permit me the unparalleled pleasure of taking your clothes off?          I feel that if I should have my penis in your vagina I should have your love; for you do not receive the wretched hardness of my desire into the sweet body of yourself without that you have not come to love me for reasons, if love has reasons, I cannot tell....          Your admirer
***
The turtle carries his house on his back. He is both the house and the person of that house.          But actually, under the shell is a little room where the true turtle, wearing long underwear, sits at a little table. At one end of the room a series of levers sticks out of slots in the floor, like the controls of a steam shovel. It is with these that the turtle controls the legs of his house.          Most of the time the turtle sits under the sloping ceiling of his turtle room reading catalogues at the little table where a candle burns. He leans on one elbow, and then the other. He crosses one leg, and then the other. Finally he yawns and buries his head in his arms and sleeps.          If he feels a child picking up his house he quickly douses the candle and runs to the control levers and activates the legs of his house and tries to escape.          If he cannot escape he retracts the legs and withdraws the so-called head and waits. He knows that children are careless, and that there will come a time when he will be free to move his house to some secluded place, where he will relight his candle, take out his catalogues and read until at last he yawns. Then he’ll bury his head in his arms and sleep....That is, until another child picks up his house....
***
The curtains part: it is a summer’s day. There a cow on a grassy slope watches as a bull charges an old aeroplane in a meadow. The bull is punching holes with its horns in the aeroplane’s fabric...          Suddenly the aeroplane’s engine ignites; the meadow is dark blue smoke...          The aeroplane shifts round and faces the charging bull.          As the bull comes in the propeller takes off the end of its muzzle. The bloody nostrils, a ring through them, are flung to the grass with a shattered blossom of teeth.          The bull, blood oozing from the stump of its face, backs off, and charges again. This time the propeller catches the bull behind its lower jaw and flings the head into a tree.          The headless bull backs off once more, and then charges down again. The propeller beating at the headless bull, cutting the body away in a great halo of blood, until only the back legs are standing. These run widely away through the meadow in figure eights and zigzags, until at last they find the aeroplane again. And as they come running down the propeller whacks them apart.          The legs, one with the tail still attached to it, the other somehow retaining both rectum and testicles, scamper off in opposite directions.          The aeroplane turns away; the engine stops.          The shadows are suddenly seen in lengthened form.          The watching cow begins to low ...
***
After a series of indiscretions a man stumbled homeward, thinking, now that I am going down from my misbehavior I am to be forgiven, because how I acted was not the true self, which I am now returning to. And I am not to be blamed for the past, because I’m to be seen as one redeemed in the present...          But when he got to the threshold of his house his house said, go away, I am not at home.          Not at home? A house is always at home; where else can it be? said the man.          I am not at home to you, said his house.          And so the man stumbled away into another series of indiscretions...
***
Like a monstrous snail, a toilet slides into a living room on a track of wet, demanding to be loved.          It is impossible, and we tender our sincerest regrets. In the book of the heart there is no mention made of plumbing.          And though we have spent our intimacy many times with you, you belong to an unfortunate reference, which we would rather not embrace ...          The toilet slides away ...
***
when your man comes home from prison, when he comes back like the wound and you are the stitch, when he comes back with pennies in his pocket and prayer fresh on his lips, you got to wash him down first. you got to have the wildweed and treebark boiled and calmed, waiting for his skin like a shining baptism back into what he was before gun barrels and bars chewed their claim in his hide and spit him stumbling backwards into screaming sunlight. you got to scrub loose the jailtime fingersmears from ashy skin, lather down the cuffmarks from ankle and wrist, rinse solitary’s stench loose from his hair, scrape curse and confession from the welted and the smooth, the hard and the soft, the furrowed and the lax. you got to hold tight that shadrach’s face between your palms, take crease and lid and lip and brow and rinse slow with river water, and when he opens his eyes you tell him calm and sure how a woman birthed him back whole again.
***
she doesn’t wear costume jewelry & she knew that walt disney was/is making a fortune off false-eyelashes and that time magazine is the authority on the knee/grow. her makeup is total-real. a negro english instructor called her:        “a fine negro poet.” a whi-te critic said:        “she’s a credit to the negro race.” somebody else called her;        “a pure negro writer.” johnnie mae, who’s a senior in high school said:        “she and Langston are the only negro poets we’ve        read in school and i understand her.” pee wee used to carry one of her poems around in his     back pocket;        the one about being cool. that was befo pee wee        was cooled by a cop’s warning shot. into the sixties a word was born . . . . . . . . BLACK & with black came poets & from the poet’s ball points came: black doubleblack purpleblack blueblack beenblack was black daybeforeyesterday blackerthan ultrablack super black blackblack yellowblack niggerblack blackwhi-te-        man blackthanyoueverbes ¼ black unblack coldblack clear black my momma’s blackerthanyourmomma pimpleblack        fall black so black we can’t even see you black on black in black by black technically black mantanblack winter black coolblack 360degreesblack coalblack midnight black black when it’s convenient rustyblack moonblack black starblack summerblack electronblack spaceman black shoeshineblack jimshoeblack underwearblack ugly black auntjimammablack, uncleben’srice black        williebest black blackisbeautifulblack i justdiscoveredblack negro black unsubstanceblack. and everywhere the lady “negro poet” appeared the poets were there. they listened & questioned & went home feeling uncomfortable/unsound & so-        untogether they read/re-read/wrote & rewrote & came back the next time to tell the lady “negro poet” how beautiful she was/is & how she helped them & she came back with:        how necessary they were and how they’ve helped her. the poets walked & as space filled the vacuum between        them & the lady “negro poet” u could hear one of the blackpoets say:        “bro, they been calling that sister by the wrong name.”
***
1Gravel paths on hillsides amid moon-drawn vineyards,click of pearls upon a polished nightstand soft as rainwater, self-minded stars, oboe music distant as the grinding of icebergs against the hullof the self and the soul in the darkness chanting to the ecstatic chance of existence.Deep is the water and long is the moonlight inscribing addresses in quicksilver ink,building the staircase a lover forever pauses upon.Deep is the darkness and long is the night,solid the water and liquid the light. How strange that they arrive at all, nights on planet earth. 2Sometimes, not often but repeatedly, the past invades my dreams in the form of a familiar neighborhood I can no longer locate, a warren of streets lined with dark cafés and unforgettable bars, a place where I can sing by heart every song on every jukebox,a city that feels the way the skin of an octopus looks pulse-changing from color to color, laminar and fluid and electric,a city of shadow-draped churches, of busses on dim avenues, or riverlights, or canyonlands, but always a city, and wonderful, and lost.Sometimes it resembles Amsterdam, students from the ballet school like fanciful gazelles shooting pool in pink tights and soft, shapeless sweaters,or Madrid at 4AM, arguing the 18th Brumaire with angry Marxists, or Manhattan when the snowfall crowns every trash-can king of its Bowery stoop,or Chicago, or Dublin, or some ideal city of the imagination, as in a movie you can neither remember entirely nor completely forget, barracuda-faced men drinking sake like yakuza in a Harukami novel, women sipping champagne or arrack, the rattle of beaded curtains in the back,the necklaces of Christmas lights reflected in raindrops on windows, the taste of peanuts and their shells crushed to powder underfoot, always real, always elusive, always a city, and wonderful, and lost. All night I wander alone, searching in vain for the irretrievable.3In the night I will drink from a cup of ashes and yellow paint.In the night I will gossip with the clouds and grow strong.In the night I will cross rooftops to watch the sea tremble in a dream.In the night I will assemble my army of golden carpenter ants.In the night I will walk the towpath among satellites and cosmic dust.In the night I will cry to the roots of potted plants in empty offices.In the night I will gather the feathers of pigeons in a honey jar.In the night I will become an infant before your flag.
***
So long I have been carrying myself Carefully, carefully, like a small child With too much water in a real glass Clasped in two hands, across a space as vast As living rooms, while gazes watch the waves That start to rile the little inland sea And slap against its cliffs' transparency, Revise and meet, double their amplitude, Harmonizing doubt from many ifs. Distant frowns like clouds begin to brood. Soon there is overbrimming. Soon the child Looks up to find a face to match the scolding, And just as he does, the vessel he was holding Is almost set down safely on the bookshelf.
***
Something has come between us— It will not sleep. Every night it rises like a fish Out of the deep. It cries with a human voice, It aches to be fed. Every night we heave it weeping Into our bed, With its heavy head lolled back, Its limbs hanging down, Like a mer-creature fetched up From the weeds of the drowned. Damp in the tidal dark, it whimpers, Tossing the cover,  Separating husband from wife, Lover from lover. It settles in the interstice, It spreads out its arms, While its cool underwater face Sharpens and warms: This is the third thing that makes Father and mother, The fierce love of our fashioning That will have no brother.
***
I said Folk was dressed in Blues but hairier and hemped. After "We acoustic banjo disciples!" Jebediah said, "When and whereforth shall the bucolic blacks with good tempers come to see us pluck as Elizabeth Cotton intended?" We stole my Uncle Windchime's minivan, penned a simple   ballad about the drag of lovelessness and drove the end of the chitlin' circuit to a joint skinny as a walk-in temple where our new folk was not that new, but strengthened by our twelve bar conviction. A month later, in pulled a parade of well meaning alabaster post adolescents. We noticed the sand-tanned and braless ones piled in the ladder-backed front row with their boyfriends first because beneath our twangor slept what I'll call a hunger for the outlawable. One night J asked me when sisters like Chapman would arrive. I shook my chin wool then, and placed my hand over the guitar string's wind- ow til it stilled. "When the moon's black," I said. "Be faithful."
***
Pretty soon the Negroes were looking to get paid. My partner, Big Trend, wiped his ox neck and said He wasn't going to wait too much longer. You Know that look your daddy gets before he whups you? That's how Big Trend looked. There was a pink scar Meddling his forehead. Most people assumed a bear Like him couldn't read anything but a dollar, But I'd watched him tour the used bookstore In town and seen him napping so I knew he held more Than power in those hands. They could tear A Bible in two. Sometimes on the walk home I'd hear Him reciting poems. But come Friday, he was the one The fellas asked to speak to the boss. He'd go alone, Usually, and left behind, we imagined the boss buckled Into Trend's shadow because our money always followed.
***
* If sound, then why not the full reach of mind, and if that cantilever then why not the whole keyboard with its totality of partials? But then one meets the dragon, pipes up a bright disciple, whose two dramas, lieber Meister, are suicide and the founding of the state. My name is a household word***
The dead were still singing Turn the lights down low Beneath Yellow Bridge where years before, clowning And ass out, Stick jumped with nothing but the State Championship trophy in his righteous clutch. The water Was supposed to be deepest there, and for three seasons Straight MVPs: Charlie "Fly" Kennison, Long Timmy Long, And Rocket Jefferson, those are the names I knew, jumped Free. But Stick's ankle broke. I fished him out, crumpled  And bawling like the day he was born, like an object of Baptism, and a life of bad luck followed in the shape of Floods and fractured lightning, and then, numb, tooth- Less, and changed, the dead refused burial, striking out, 2 By 2, 4 by 4, from the morgue house to raise trouble at The bridge. I started hearing birds everywhere after that.
***
After dark, the bar full of women part of me loves—the part that stood naked outside the window of Miss Geneva, recent divorcée who owned a gun, O Miss Geneva where are you now—Orpheus says she did not perish, she was not turned to ash in the brutal light, she found a good job, she made good money, she had her own insurance and a house, she was a decent wife. I know descent lives in the word decent. The bar noise makes a kind of silence. When Orpheus hands me his sunglasses, I see how fire changes everything. In the mind I am behind a woman whose skirt is hiked above her hips, as bound as touch permits, saying don't forget me when I become the liquid out of which names are born, salt-milk, milk-sweet and animal-made. I want to be a human above the body, uprooted and right, a fold of pleas released, but I am a black wound, what's left of the deed.
***
Even if you love the racket of ascension, you must know how the power leaves you. And at this pitch who has time for meditation? the sea walled in by buildings. I do miss the quiet, don't you? When I said, "Fuck the deer antlered and hithered in fur," it was because I had seen the faces of presidents balled into a fist. If I were in charge, I would know how to fix the world: free health care or free physicals, at least, and an abiding love for the abstract. When I said, "All of history is saved for us," it was because I scorned the emancipated sky. Does the anthem choke you up? When I asked God if anyone born to slaves would die a slave, He said: "Sure as a rock descending a hillside." That's why I'm not a Christian.
***
If only I could forget him, the Frenchman I saw outside our quarters, creeping round near daybreak in that density of garden as if he'd almost grown into the ground. He was just looking back, peering about him to check that he was safe here and alone: once he was sure, his plunder was all his! Whatever chanced, he'd not be moving on. He was already eating. He was wolfing a pilfered turnip hidden in his rags. Eating raw cattle feed. But he'd no sooner swallowed a mouthful than it made him gag; and the sweet food encountered on his tongue delight and then disgust, as it might be the unhappy and the happy, meeting in their bodies' all-consuming ecstasy. Only forget that body. . . Shoulder blades trembling, and a hand all skin and bone, the palm cramming his mouth in such a way that it too seemed to feed in clinging on. And then the furious and desperate shame of organs galled with one another, forced to tear from one another what should bind them together in community at last. The way his clumsy feet had been left out of all that gibbering bestial joy; and how they stood splayed out and paralyzed beneath the body's torture and fierce rapture now. And his look too—if I could forget that! Retching, he went on gobbling as if driven on and on, just to eat, no matter what, anything, this or that, himself even. Why go on? It turned out that he'd escaped from the prison camp nearby—guards came for him. I wander, as I did then in that garden, among my garden shadows here at home. "If only I could forget him, the Frenchman"— I'm looking through my notes, I read one out, and from my ears, my eyes, my mouth, the seething memory boils over in his shout: "I'm hungry!" And immediately I feel the undying hunger which this wretched creature has long since ceased to feel, for which there is no mitigating nourishment in nature. He feeds on me. More and more hungrily! And I'm less and less sufficient, for my part. Now he, who would have been contented once with any kind of food, demands my heart.
***
Where you've fallen, you will stay. In the whole universe this one and only place is the sole place which you have made your very own. The country runs away from you. House, mill, poplar—every thing is struggling with you here, as if in nothingness mutating. But now it's you who won't give up. Did we fleece you? You've grown rich. Did we blind you? You watch us still. You bear witness without speech.
***
A battle lost in the cornfields and in the sky a victory. Birds, the sun and birds again. By night, what will be left of me? By night, only a row of lamps, a wall of yellow clay that shines, and down the garden, through the trees, like candles in a row, the panes; there I dwelt once and dwell no longer— I can't live where I once lived, though the roof there used to cover me. Lord, you covered me long ago.
***
As gestures to beckon geometry's end I post letters to my lost Mayan sisters,   solicit layers sussed from layers to test history, push past parallel. Mystery becomes you, Mother, as does the lust the rest of us suffer, lust you must once have induced. What perceptions I trust defy perspective. I take my troubles scribbled, not erased.
***
August long ago, the summer Lemnian (not like the deeds of those who killed their men), the self a glowing bead, like Hephaestus falling daylong out of heaven in the old story, the island's interior a forge, a glory hole, the odor of wild thyme borne offshore steadily, the Aegean Sea purple, wine-dark, without epithet; and as I walked on the beach, my mother not long dead, the perfect crystal of my self-regard so lately flawed, and landscape made to echo my own low cry in the island's empty places, I found a pure white bone that wind and salt had scoured of every grief and all self-pity: and so I came to the love of others.
***
Last night she came to me, my mother, dead: but as she was in the photo, that last Christmas, wearing a red dress, and her lipstick was red (I wonder if that means she lives in hell), and I saw again that she was beautiful, the same high forehead I have, the same wide brow, and just my age, forty-nine; and now I was talking fast, because I knew I had no time, and I told her I loved her, I told her how her life had informed mine, and I begged her to come to me again, to meet my children, my wife. I said to her—My work, see what I have made, I have tried to do what you did not live to do. But she smiled at me and began to fade.
***
"I thought of you as a butterfly tonight," getting to eschatology from a sketchpad, your mom's. And though you write sermons nice and linear you also digress and about-face. The jeroboam trees are dark tonight. Darker in the outage than the stars let the sky be. Partyers all. The abbot told you, "I do not have power, the archbishop does not have power, the pope does not have power. Only God has power." Then it is not a kind of violence to put a photo of the Pope in a luscious hacienda, imperilled by a minature pullbell. Someone admired the hostess's oils. "Yes, it was a surprise when they hired me to teach but they said, 'We can teach an artist to teach but we can't teach a teacher to be an artist.'" "How true," the guests murmured. This was not your mother though artists all say it "comes from somewhere else." When another guest compared the Catholic to the Episcopal service she said, "I think not." In a desert once I almost fell off a cliff. To calm me down a friend told a joke: "Descartes was sitting on a plane. The stewardess said, 'Coffee or tea?' 'I think not,' Descartes said, and vanished." It took a moment to sink in because I thought he said "The cart" as in "beverage cart." Confusion is the only way to get to eschatology from a sketchpad. I'm trying to redeem that abbot. Drawing in the outage. Once you suggest the origins of music lay in the necessity of drowning out the cries of sacrificial victims, I start listening for them—the cries—under my own singing. Scholars resurrect books all the time just by quoting them. When Roman gods popped out of the soil, the Christians looked around wildly. Sculpt the mouth around "sculpture," ulpt. They reburied them hurriedly, and the earth gulped. The statue of the Commendatore went down with Don Giovanni. Which shall I believe, the unrepentence of the sinkholed Don? Or the statue that converts Leontes by resurrecting his all-forgiving wife? Hermione who's peerless has a likeness; he who won't about-face is not "mocked by art" but brought posthaste to hell, his "shapely seat and heart". . . The moon slips out like a foreign coin from denim: a drachma, an as. Can we redeem it? Cities are places are conversion, you said. But I am citiless. "She ascended to the thrown," you wrote by mistake, of Elizabeth.
***
The mallet strikes but something's off, and so he hits again, curling that lower lip, purses his brow, as if this sign, this minor woe, were speech the vibes might understand, so when he lifts bluish lids as if wakened to the desired tone that rings now, it seems, it sounds, under wraps, a water-ly quaver, through the club crowd's silence, as it floats above us like an aerosol trying to find a new way to escape, passes through the wall's mortared pores to reverb in the cool night air of an unpeopled sidewalk, droning toward tracks where a passing peopled train sucks up and winds his finally found, wowed tone around its wheels, held there by steel heat one hundred miles, until it reaches the sea, where wheels and whistle overreach surging surf the good vibration feels such desire for, and leaves its tedium of the round and round, lofting to a sea that comes and goes but finally simply goes, as one night, this night, the cool vibes' air (struck finally in the changed groove of sax and ecstatic kit) is free, finally free, to go where we won't hear from it again.
***
The Santa Fe Depot's Moorish architecture of displacement— squeaky kids trawl satchels through the shed, happy voices mystically far from home, the waiting room's fizzled, tiled light of life lived imperfectly between one where and another. Everybody's here. Cowboys, Mennonites, Tijuana illegals, Muslim cabbies at prayer on loading docks as dark clouds fuss above the southerly sun past its prime. Killing time, a life mostly miscues and hesitance, I want something to take me over so looked for you near the baggage claim's glide, who could have been  anybody from everywhere, like Ellis Island's ghosts, their dump of cardboard valises, bindles, baby-fat sacks strangled by hemp, and around me here long-haul lovers who in sleepers last night loved to exhaustion. Scorched roughnecks, perfumed girls in heels grabbing Samsonites and golf bags schooling the carousel's louvered U-turns and straightaways. It must be why I'm here, to wait and see who claims what looks too much like your brown suede duffel, no "Antigua" or "Cancun" decaled in its hide, nasal music threading the scene while tonight you weave through songs somewhere else. That floppy bag and us— the Garment District, two Venices, South End, South Philly, scraped nap, brass clips, gaunt warmed handle. . . A teenage girl two-hands it off the belt and waddles into the runny sun, your bag five years late thumping freshened thighs and dimpled knees. Where are you now that you're here again for me? Hear these thrilled voices,                                        the engine horn howling?                                                                                  Smell these acid residues?
***
O fluent one, o muscle full of hydrogen, o stuff of grief, whom the Greeks accuse of spoiling souls, whose destiny is downward, whose reflecting's up—I think I must have come from you. Just one more cup.
***
herd on da wind you come back fo me didn’t think you come back fo me didn’t think you come back at all been so long my skin grew tired dis life too hard to know all alone caroline cover me jus fine she a quilt ginst the cold in ma blood she mend de torn spots in ma soul aint got no mind ta leev dis place go on moses   find yo promise lan mines is here beside dis fire wid folks we knows from when we’s born
***
He gossips like my grandmother, this man with my face, and I could stand amused all afternoon in the Hon Kee Grocery, amid hanging meats he chops: roast pork cut from a hog hung by nose and shoulders, her entire skin burnt crisp, flesh I know to be sweet, her shining face grinning up at ducks dangling single file, each pierced by black hooks through breast, bill, and steaming from a hole stitched shut at the ass. I step to the counter, recite, and he, without even slightly varying the rhythm of his current confession or harangue, scribbles my order on a greasy receipt, and chops it up quick. Such a sorrowful Chinese face, nomad, Gobi, Northern in its boniness clear from the high warlike forehead to the sheer edge of the jaw. He could be my brother, but finer, and, except for his left forearm, which is engorged, sinewy from his daily grip and wield of a two-pound tool, he's delicate, narrow- waisted, his frame so slight a lover, some rough other might break it down its smooth, oily length. In his light-handed calligraphy on receipts and in his moodiness, he is a Southerner from a river-province; suited for scholarship, his face poised above an open book, he’d mumble his favorite passages. He could be my grandfather; come to America to get a Western education in 1917, but too homesick to study, he sits in the park all day, reading poems and writing letters to his mother. He lops the head off, chops the neck of the duck into six, slits the body open, groin to breast, and drains the scalding juices, then quarters the carcass with two fast hacks of the cleaver, old blade that has worn into the surface of the round foot-thick chop-block a scoop that cradles precisely the curved steel. The head, flung from the body, opens down the middle where the butcher cleanly halved it between the eyes, and I see, foetal-crouched inside the skull, the homunculus, gray brain grainy to eat. Did this animal, after all, at the moment its neck broke, image the way his executioner shrinks from his own death? Is this how I, too, recoil from my day? See how this shape hordes itself, see how little it is. See its grease on the blade. Is this how I’ll be found when judgement is passed, when names are called, when crimes are tallied? This is also how I looked before I tore my mother open. Is this how I presided over my century, is this how I regarded the murders? This is also how I prayed. Was it me in the Other I prayed to when I prayed? This too was how I slept, clutching my wife. Was it me in the other I loved when I loved another? The butcher sees me eye this delicacy. With a finger, he picks it out of the skull-cradle and offers it to me. I take it gingerly between my fingers and suck it down. I eat my man. The noise the body makes when the body meets the soul over the soul’s ocean and penumbra is the old sound of up-and-down, in-and-out, a lump of muscle chug-chugging blood into the ear; a lover’s heart-shaped tongue; flesh rocking flesh until flesh comes; the butcher working at his block and blade to marry their shapes by violence and time; an engine crossing, re-crossing salt water, hauling immigrants and the junk of the poor. These are the faces I love, the bodies and scents of bodies for which I long in various ways, at various times, thirteen gathered around the redwood, happy, talkative, voracious at day’s end, eager to eat four kinds of meat prepared four different ways, numerous plates and bowls of rice and vegetables, each made by distinct affections and brought to table by many hands. Brothers and sisters by blood and design, who sit in separate bodies of varied shapes, we constitute a many-membered body of love. In a world of shapes of my desires, each one here is a shape of one of my desires, and each is known to me and dear by virtue of each one’s unique corruption of those texts, the face, the body: that jut jaw to gnash tendon; that wide nose to meet the blows a face like that invites; those long eyes closing on the seen; those thick lips to suck the meat of animals or recite 300 poems of the T’ang; these teeth to bite my monosyllables; these cheekbones to make those syllables sing the soul. Puffed or sunken according to the life, dark or light according to the birth, straight or humped, whole, manqué, quasi, each pleases, verging on utter grotesquery. All are beautiful by variety. The soul too is a debasement of a text, but, thus, it acquires salience, although a human salience, but inimitable, and, hence, memorable. God is the text. The soul is a corruption and a mnemonic. A bright moment, I hold up an old head from the sea and admire the haughty down-curved mouth that seems to disdain all the eyes are blind to, including me, the eater. Whole unto itself, complete without me, yet its shape complements the shape of my mind. I take it as text and evidence of the world’s love for me, and I feel urged to utterance, urged to read the body of the world, urged to say it in human terms, my reading a kind of eating, my eating a kind of reading, my saying a diminishment, my noise a love-in-answer. What is it in me would devour the world to utter it? What is it in me will not let the world be, would eat not just this fish, but the one who killed it, the butcher who cleaned it. I would eat the way he squats, the way he reaches into the plastic tubs and pulls out a fish, clubs it, takes it to the sink, guts it, drops it on the weighing pan. I would eat that thrash and plunge of the watery body in the water, that liquid violence between the man’s hands, I would eat the gutless twitching on the scales, three pounds of dumb nerve and pulse, I would eat it all to utter it. The deaths at the sinks, those bodies prepared for eating, I would eat, and the standing deaths at the counters, in the aisles, the walking deaths in the streets, the death-far-from-home, the death- in-a-strange-land, these Chinatown deaths, these American deaths. I would devour this race to sing it, this race that according to Emerson managed to preserve to a hair for three or four thousand years the ugliest features in the world.***
Insanity is not a want of reason. It is reason's overgrowth, a calculating kudzu. Explaining why, in two-ton manifesti, thinkers sally forth with testaments and pipe bombs. Heaven help us: spare us all your meaningful designs. Shine down or shower forth, but (for the earthling's sake) ignore all prayers followed by against, or for. Teach us to bear life's senselessness, our insignificance, and more; let's call that sanity. The terrifying prospect isn't some escapist with a novel, fond of comfort, munching sweets— it is the busy hermeneut, so serious he's sour, intent on making meaning of us all, and bursting from the towers to the streets.
***
Lined up behind the space bartender is the meaning of it all, the vessels marked with letters, numbers, signs. Beyond the flats the monitor looms, for all the world like the world. Images and motions, weeping women, men in hats. I have killed many happy hours here, with my bare hands, where TV passes for IV, among the space cadets and dingbats.
***
I wanted it: arc of red and blue  strobing my skin, sirens singing  my praises, the cinching embrace  of the cot as the ambulance  slammed shut and steered away.  More than needle-pierce  or dragging blade, I wanted the swab  of alcohol and cotton, the promise  of gauze-covered cure.  My mother saved anyone    who asked, but never me,  never the way I wanted:  her palms skimming my limbs  for injury, her fingers finding  what hurt, her lips whispering,  I got here just in time.
***
Historians will tell you my uncle wouldn't have called it World War II or the Great War plus One or Tombstone over My Head.***
He has five children, I’m papa to a hundred pencils. I bought the chair he sat in from a book of chairs, staplers and spikes that let me play Vlad the Impaler with invading memos. When I said I have to lay you off a parallel universe was born in his face, one where flesh is a loose shirt taken to the river and beaten against rocks. Just by opening my mouth I destroyed his faith he’s a man who can think honey-glazed ham and act out the thought with plastic or bills. We sat. I stared at my hands, he stared at the wall staring at my hands. I said other things about the excellent work he’d done and the cycles of business which are like the roller-coaster thoughts of an oscilloscope. All this time I saw the eyes of his wife which had always been brown like almonds but were now brown like the crust of bread. We walked to the door, I shook his hand, felt the bones pretending to be strong. On his way home there was a happy song because de Sade invented radio, the window was open, he saw delphinium but couldn’t remember the name. I can only guess. Maybe at each exit that could have led his body to Tempe, to Mars, he was tempted to forget his basketball team of sons, or that he ever liked helping his wife clean carrots, the silver sink turning orange. Running’s natural to most animals who aren’t part of a lecture series on Nature’s Dead Ends. When I told him, I saw he was looking for a place in his brain to hide his brain. I tried that later with beer, it worked until I stood at the toilet to make my little waterfall, and thought of him pushing back from a bar to go make the same noise.
***
The telephone company calls and asks what the fuss is. Betty from the telephone company, who’s not concerned with the particulars of my life. For instance if I believe in the transubstantiation of Christ or am gladdened at 7:02 in the morning to repeat an eighth time why a man wearing a hula skirt of tools slung low on his hips must a fifth time track mud across my white kitchen tile to look down at a phone jack. Up to a work order. Down at a phone jack. Up to a work order. Over at me. Down at a phone jack. Up to a work order before announcing the problem I have is not the problem I have because the problem I have cannot occur in this universe though possibly in an alternate universe which is not the responsibility or in any way the product, child, or subsidiary of AT&T. With practice I’ve come to respect this moment. One man in jeans, t-shirt and socks looking across space at a man with probes and pliers of various inclinations, nothing being said for five or ten seconds, perhaps I’m still in pajamas and he has a cleft pallet or is so tall that gigantism comes to mind but I can’t remember what causes flesh to pile that high, five or ten seconds of taking in and being taken in by eyes and a brain, during which I don’t build a shot gun from what’s at hand, oatmeal and National Geographics, or a taser from hair caught in the drain and the million volts of frustration popping through my body. Even though. Even though his face is an abstract painting called Void. Even though I’m wondering if my pajama flap is open, placing me at a postural disadvantage. Breathe I say inside my head, which is where I store thoughts for the winter. All is an illusion***
Seeing my friend’s son in his broad-brimmed hat and suspenders, I think of the Quakers who lectured us on nonviolent social action every week when I was a child. In the classrooms we listened to those who would not take up arms, who objected, who had accepted alternative service in distant work camps and showed slides of hospitals they helped to build. On Wednesdays, in Meeting for Worship, when someone rose to speak, all the energy in the room flew inside her mouth, empowering her to tell what she had seen on her brief encounter with the divine: sometimes, a parable, a riddle, a kindness. The fall that we were seventeen, we scuffed our loafers on the gravelly path from the Meetinghouse, while maple and elm leaves sailed around our shoulders   like tiny envelopes, our futures sealed inside. Despite the war in Vietnam, I felt safer than I ever would again. Perhaps those aged, protective trees had cast a spell on us, or maybe the nonviolent Quaker God had set up a kingdom right there— suburban Philadelphia. Looking back, I see how good deeds and thoughts climbed with us to the attic room for Latin, descended to the gym for sports, where we hung from the praiseworthy scaffolds of righteous behavior. We prepared to leave for college, armed with the language of the American Friends and the memories of Thanksgiving dinners we’d cooked for the unfortunates: borrowing our parents’ cars to drive downtown to the drop-off point, racing back to play our last field hockey match. Grim center forwards shook hands before the whistle, the half-backs’ knee-pads strapped on tight; one varsity team vanquished another.
***
I knew the hard winter of sapphires set within gold claws, amber and pipestone strung on gut, fringed pouches stuffed with hash. Separate, separate, I urged her that summer of Woodstock, when I lied to get the car and draped my love beads around the neck of someone else’s sister. In a hayloft in Ohio my friend lifted three bales to show me a litter of week-old kittens, each pair of eyes infected with a slimy mucus. Their pupils swam in opaque opal membranes and they would have gone blind if she had not pulled an eyedropper of antibiotics from her jacket, doing what the mother cat could not do, what the owners would not trouble themselves to do, doing what a sister or friend might do if she took the time to attend the wayward, opalescent unhappiness in this world.
***
I’ve expanded like the swollen door in summer             to fit my own dimension. Your loneliness is a letter I read and put away, a daily reminder             in the cry of the magpie that I am still capable of inflicting pain             at this distance. Like a painting, our talk is dense with description,             half-truths, landscapes, phrases layered with a patina over time. When she came into my life             I didn’t hesitate. Or is that only how it seems now, looking back?             Or is that only how you accuse me, looking back? Long ago, this desert was an inland sea. In the mountains             you can still find shells. It’s these strange divagations I’ve come to love: midday sun             on pink escarpments; dusk on gray sandstone; toe-and-finger holes along the three hundred and fifty-seven foot             climb to Acoma Pueblo, where the spirit of the dead hovers about its earthly home             four days, before the prayer sticks drive it away. Today all good Jews collect their crimes like old clothes             to be washed and given to the poor. I remember how my father held his father around the shoulders             as they walked to the old synagogue in Philadelphia. "We're almost there, Pop," he said. "A few more blocks."             I want to tell you that we, too, are almost there, for someone has mapped this autumn field with meaning, and any day             October brooding in me, will open to reveal our names—inscribed or absent —              among the dry thistles and spent weeds.
***
It is the right time for hallucinations. Drowning in a sty, the sailor feels the ocean’s buoyancy. Dying in a web, the moth discards its wings and falls free. I wish something would put its hands on me, give me stronger poison and then stronger. The beautiful flotillas do not stop. Undying love drifts and delays. I am capsizing. Great joy lingers still. Nothing can be said for suffering. It is legible only to strangers and at great distances. It detests survivors. It drapes gun-carriages with flowers, lampposts with hanging boys. It is the right time for hallucinations, most nakedly of inmost west. Her death would be less tender now, dusted over with charity, a web of useless wings, a shallow sty. She gave me stronger poison and then stronger. I miss her. In the back seat of the taxi, dark breathlessness says “Hurry, hurry.”
***
Sleep softly . . . eagle forgotten . . . under the stone.Time has its way with you there, and the clay has its own.“We have buried him now,” thought your foes, and in secret rejoiced.They made a brave show of their mourning, their hatred unvoiced. They had snarled at you, barked at you, foamed at you day after day, Now you were ended. They praised you . . . and laid you away. The others that mourned you in silence and terror and truth,The widow bereft of her crust, and the boy without youth,The mocked and the scorned and the wounded, the lame and the poor, That should have remembered forever . . . remember no more. Where are those lovers of yours, on what name do they call, The lost, that in armies wept over your funeral pall?They call on the names of a hundred high-valiant ones,A hundred white eagles have risen the sons of your sons,The zeal in their wings is a zeal that your dreaming beganThe valor that wore out your soul in the service of man.Sleep softly . . . eagle forgotten . . . under the stone, Time has its way with you there and the clay has its own. Sleep on, O brave-hearted, O wise man that kindled the flame—To live in mankind is far more than to live in a name,To live in mankind, far, far more . . . than to live in a name.
***
It has never been so easy to cry openly or to acknowledge children. Never before could I walk directly to the center of an island city feeling the automatism of millions drawing one pious breath, shouldering the sunset, holding it up in the oily tree-line a while longer. Years ago, I was never sad enough and nothing but a hotel that I could tear to pieces and reconstruct inside a shoebox felt like home. My parents died. Their miserable possessions washed up in other hotels, dioramas of the febrile romantic. I take my first lover, already gray at her temples and more reticent than shy, more tacit than admiring, to the bus stop by the Jewish Museum. We wait in the dark a long time. She does not kiss me. She hurries up out of the oily street onto the humming, fluorescent podium of the last bus where I see her a last time, not waving to me, not lovable, erect in the freedom we traduced years ago in our first kiss. Never deny the power of withdrawal. Never doubt that thought and time make things small. Never refuse the easy exit line or prescribed uncomprehending gesture. At childhood’s end, none can tell happiness from buoyancy. None of it made any difference— the patricides, the hotels ill-constructed, the inconstant starlight of drugs and rebellion. We are no more complicated than our great-grandparents who dreaded the hotel life. Like them, we seek the refuge of warm days in January, a piety whose compulsion is to survive according to explicit laws no young woman adores or young man follows with darling hunger.
***
The unsigned architecture of loneliness is becoming taller, finding a way farther above the horizontal flowering of the Cold War, the peonies and star asters of wild partisanship. I have a shambling gait and lonely hysteria, but no Terror. I am free to shamble past the vacant lot of my son’s conception, to shamble past the bar where I conceived adultery as a Terror that would be endless, flowering in great waves through air striated like chenille. I walk for a long time and try to conjure elsewhere in its early isolation. I cannot. It is all redestinated by the future like the loose balloons a janitor recovers at 6 am from cold light fixtures. The Cold War is ending. Buildings are taller and have no names. 1. The romance of every ideology torments the romance of another. How beautifully, in the beginning, in the gale and embrace of isolation, boys capered over a shambles and swore oaths. The scent of urine in the hall at home was righteousness. The beautiful nude obscured by dust in a paperweight was righteousness. Neglectful townships coming into steep flower just as boys were flowering needed the correction of righteousness,   the horizontal slag of government by children. Only the insane allegiances endure. The mad counterparts are lovers passion cannot explain nor circumstances restrict to the dead zones of irony. A counterpart of end of the Cold War is adultery. A counterpart of loving a divided Berlin unto death is fatherhood, the doting maintenance of sons in vacant lots continuing the wars of rubble for righteousness’ sake and for the sake of nudes obscured by dust and vulgarity. Romance torments romance. The most beautiful moment of the twentieth century galed and embraced the acrid smoky air as the Red Army entered Berlin as Hitler shriveled in the gasoline fire as Red Army flags opened above Berlin safeguarding the ruins of a changeless future. Townships blackened even as they flowered. Loose balloons cluttered the low sky and sun. I walked for a long time and tried to conjure the form of kindness. It was a domestic animal confused in the tall grass. Boys set fire to the grass. History that opens flags opened the fire, and Berlin, divided from Berlin, began to love its children past all reason. 2. My son reads sermons of pain and writes on walls. He starves the ground he walks on, preparing a dead city to be worthy of its new flags, to shine as exploded windows shine, raining down for hours after the wrecking crews have gone. I have a lover now who hates children. The hatred floats inside of her, a weightless sexual pavilion of perfect form and perfect emptiness. I thought by making love to her I would conceive nothing but Terror, outrage upon outrage, a violence that would last my whole life and free my son. I was ignorant as a balloon. Across the luminous expressway, I see the shapes of charred tenements castellated, fading into the more tender shapes of night. It may be the last night in history. Tomorrow pulls down the Berlin Wall, pulls down my honor, and I return to my lover’s bed to float in a white condom, no longer my son’s father. Tomorrow describes everything in detail. It explains nothing. It does not teach my boy that tenements are better than the future, better that peace, more likely to produce brothers than are the glassy hands of mornings without end or walls denuded of their wire. In the dead zone of irony before dawn, only the cats cry, like martyrs in the flame. 3. Gates everywhere. The Brandenburg. The Great Gate of Kiev beneath which children stride onto an invisible crescendo disappearing into gasoline fires, emerging as the new shapes of righteousness in slow vans through the Brandenburg Gate. Oaths are secret because none suspects that they are kept. They thrust themselves towards us unashamedly, like the insane homeless, and we do not see them. In our loneliness, we see a chance for love in betrayal, not death. In our loneliness, we see the happy triumph of glassy hands in free elections, not the denuding of Berlin or wanderings of children in vans reduced by fire to black transparencies in the morning shade. When Joan of Arc surrendered to the flames she cried out “Jesus, Jesus.” Some years later, a failed magician who had lover her cried out “Joan, Joan” as the flames mocked him with a sortilege too easy to be unreal or profitable. I walk for a long time and try to conjure the form of loneliness without Cold War. It is ash upon ash, a chiaroscuro aloft and on the ground, completely still. Oaths are secret because none suspects the desperation of every object, the child in every atom of the misused world thrust towards us, crying out whatever sacred name it witnessed put to death on the ascending music of a wall. Our buildings are tall and have no names. The parks grow glassy hands instead of flowers. 4. Afterwards, the calm is piteous but insubstantial as a smell of burn that does not rise in smoke or dies with the fire. Imagine walking out of a house at sunrise and having to invent air, invent light from nothing but untriggered memory. All things beloved are recalled to pain. Air recollected from the wrists of girls braceleted for Confirmation, crossed. Light recollected from between the cars of night trains in a deep river valley where islands in the river glowed like swans. Air recollected form a ditch in flower. Light recollected from the sex of flowers in bare rooms, the grainy light of blondes. Air recollected from religion. Light recollected form the incensed clutch of bodies before sunrise in the oaths of a great and ignorant lost cause. Imagine walking out of a house at sunrise having spent the night in bed with a stranger. Aloft and on the ground the calm unfurls like flags without device or slogan. The inconsequence of the day ahead stirs airless atmospheres in darkness visible as daylight but without shade. Without Cold War, without the arbitrary demarcation of cause from cause, of light and air from the unsexed improvisations of memory, I cannot see to walk or breathe to breathe. Sex becomes applause. Sex becomes television, and the bastard avant garde of lonely architecture breaks ground at the unwired heart of a city that marks the capital of nothing now. 5. A scratchy, recorded call to prayer crosses the alley from one new building into mine. The consolations of history are furtive, then fugitive, then forgotten like a bar of music that might have been obscene or sacred once, in another city, in the days before today. My son is well. He works the public ground and needs no Antigone. My lover sits beside him at dinner, sharing a joke, unmapping the tall future and its unbiased children, reinventing the sexual pavilion to accommodate plague wards. Romance forgives romance. The early isolation of this gorgeous century disappears into good works. The future is best. To put a final stop to the grotesque unmercy of martyrdom and to the ruinous armies of mad boys whose government is rape, whose justice is a wall, revoke all partisanship, adjourn the Terror. The future is best. It unobscures the dusty nudes. It protects the river islands and their glowing swans. But when I need to die, who will light the fire? What names shall I cry out and what music burn to a black transparency in my heart? The unborn have been revoked. They will not be kind.
***
We barge out of the womb   with two of them: eyes, ears,   arms, hands, legs, feet.   Only one heart.  Not a good   plan.  God should know we   need at least a dozen,   a baker’s dozen of hearts.   They break like Easter eggs   hidden in the grass,   stepped on and smashed.   My own heart is patched,   bandaged, taped, barely   the same shape it once was   when it beat fast for you.
***
Thousands of planes were flying and then they stopped. We spend days moving our eyes across makeshift desks, we sit on a makeshift floor; we prepare for almost nothing that might happen. Early on, distant relations kept calling. Now, nothing: sound of water tippling a seawall. Nothing: sparks lighting the brush, sparks polishing the hail, the flotsam of cars left standing perfectly still. Thud of night bird against night air, there you are on the porch, swath of feathers visible through the glass, there you are on the stairs where the cat fell like a stone because her heart stopped. What have you found in the wind above town square? Is it true that even the statues have gone? Is there really a hush over everything as there used to be in morning when one by one we took off our veils?
***
more the idea of the flame than the flame, as in: the flame of the rose petal, the flame of the thorn the sun is a flame, the dog’s teeth flames ~ to be clear: with the body, captain, we can do as we wish, we can do as we wish with the body but we cannot leave marks—capt’n I’m trying to get this right ~ the world’s so small, the sky’s so high we pray for rain it rains, we pray for sun it suns we pray on our knees, we move our lips we pray in our minds, we clasp our hands our hands look tied before us ~ I remember, capt’n, something, it didn’t happen, not to me—this guy, I knew him by face, I don’t remember his name, one night he’s walking home from a party, a car it clipped him, for hours he wandered, dazed, his family, his neighbors, with flashlights they searched, all night, the woods, calling out his name ~ here’s the part, capt’n, where I try to tell a story as if it were a confession: once, in elementary school, I was hiding out on damon rock, lighting matches & letting them drop to the leaves below—little flare- ups, flash fires—a girl wandered down the path, she just stood there, watching the matches fall from my hand— ~ capt’n, I’m trying to be precise: hot day, a cage in the sun, a room without air, the mind-bending heat, the music a flame—hey metallica hey britanny hey airless hey fuse, I don’t know how it happened, I was perched far above, I offered her a match to pull down her pants—one match, her hairless body, hey little girl, I dropped it unlit.   I didn’t know what it was I was looking at. ~ hey capt’n I don’t know if I’m allowed hey capt’n years ago I’m walking down a road one drunk night, even now I wonder—sometimes still I imagine—was I hit by a bus, am I stumbling am I   dazed, this dream this confession, hey little girl is yr daddy home, hey capt’n hey sir am I making any sense? ~ the boy stood on the burning deck, stammering elocution, wait— the boy stood in the burning cage, stammering electrocution, no—the boy stood in the hot-hot room stammering I did stammering I did stammering I did stammering I did stammering everything you say I did I did. ~ hey metallica hey britanny hey airless hey fuse hey phonograph hey hades hey thoughtless hey ~ capt’n this room is on fire capt’n, this body will not stop burning capt’n oh my captain this burning has become a bodycapt’n oh my captain this child is ash capt’n oh my captain my hands pass right through her capt’n oh my captain I don’t know what it is I’m looking at ~ it’s important to be precise, to say what I know— the sun is fire, the center of the earth is fire, yr mother’s cunt is fire, an airless flame, still, still, I don’t know why she pushed me out, this cold-cold furnace, we all were pushed, a rim of light around our heads, she gave a kick, sent us crawling out, toward the flame, toward the pit, the flaming pit, yr lover’s cunt, the flame her tongue, the flame a thorn ~ everyday, capt’n, sir, captain, I was left, a child, after school, I was alone, I found a match, under the sink I found a can, a spray can, ly-sol dis-infectant, it made a torch, I was careful the flame didn’t enter the can, I knew it would explode, somehow I knew, I’m trying to be clear sir—the flame shot across the room, then it was gone
***
As if there could be a world Of absolute innocence In which we forget ourselves The owners throw sticks And half-bald tennis balls Toward the surf And the happy dogs leap after them As if catapulted— Black dogs, tan dogs, Tubes of glorious muscle— Pursuing pleasure More than obedience They race, skid to a halt in the wet sand, Sometimes they'll plunge straight into The foaming breakers Like diving birds, letting the green turbulence Toss them, until they snap and sink Teeth into floating wood Then bound back to their owners Shining wet, with passionate speed For nothing, For absolutely nothing but joy.
***
On summer nights I sleep nakedin Jerusalem. My bedstands on the brink of a deep valleywithout rolling down into it.In the daytime I walk around with the TenCommandments on my lipslike an old tune someone hums to himself.Oh touch me, touch me, good woman!That’s not a scar you feel under my shirt, that’s a letter of recommendation, folded up tight,from my father:“All the same, he’s a good boy, and full of love.”I remember my father waking me for early prayers.He would do it by gently stroking my forehead, notby tearing away the blanket.Since then I love him even more.And as his reward, may he be wakenedgently and with loveon the Day of the Resurrection.
***
I went to his sixty-sixth birthday dinner: sixteen years ago this past November. I remember that it was at Chelsea Central (his favorite restaurant: great steaks) on 10th Avenue, and that Ashbery was there, and a few others, including Joe, impeccably dressed and gracious, who picked up what must have been (I thought at the time) an exorbitant bill. I remember him saying more than once, “Joe always picks up the bill,” then smiling a slightly wicked smile. Sitting with him (those excruciating silences!) in his room at the Chelsea, my eyes would wander from his book- shelves (The Portrait of a Lady stood out) to the pan of water on the radiator to the records strewn on the floor to some scraggly plants (ivy? herbs?) in ceramic pots at the base of the French doors that opened to the balcony and balustrade and sound of traffic on 23rd Street six floors below. He read me “White Boat, Blue Boat” shortly after he wrote it, and a poem about Brook Benton singing “Rainy Night in Georgia” that didn’t make it into his Last Poems, though I remember thinking it beautiful. He complained, in a letter to Tom, about how much I smoked, and how emotional I’d get during movies: he must have been referring to Field of Dreams (he had a yen for Kevin Costner). When he took me to see L'Atalante, a film he loved, I was bored. Once, we took the subway (he hadn’t ridden it in years) to the Frick; I remember admiring Romney’s Lady Hamilton. It hurt that he didn’t invite me to the dinner after his Dia reading or to the reception after his reading at the 92nd Street Y, though he did, at the latter, read “Mood Indigo,” dedicated to me. When he said my name from the stage, Joan and Eileen, sitting to my left, turned and stared at me; frozen by the enormity of the moment, I couldn’t look back. When he came to a reading I gave at St. Mark’s, Raymond impressed upon me what an honor it was: Jimmy didn’t go to many poetry readings. What else is there to say? That when I visited him at St. Vincent’s the day before he died Darragh said, “He likes to hear gossip.” So I said, “Eileen and I are talking again.” That at his funeral I sat alone (Ira couldn’t come); that that was the loneliest feeling in the world. That afterwards Doug said “You look so sad.” How should I have looked, Doug! And that a year after he died, I dreamt I saw him in the lobby of the Chelsea Hotel. He was wearing a hospital shift and seemed to have no muscle control over his face—like in inten- sive care after his stroke. He saw me and said, “It’s nice to see some familiar faces.” I approached him, but he disappeared.
***
You call me to the bath, where by evening light before bed I rub the ointment into your maculate back. I place my hand between the wings of your scapulae, where you cannot reach, cannot see—the arc of your life revealed in its pattern of coffee-colored spots—and hover there awhile, remembering how we watched the lover read the manuscript painted on the skin of his beloved; how he pressed the words to his chest and face—and cried out. The arteries in my palm open, their warmth rising between us as I massage you, neither sexual nor umbilical, this connection—you trusting your back to me, and me with no deceit. Only salve, only unguent. Only balm.
***
Sharpen your wit—Each half of it—Before you shutScissors to cutShear skin deepUnderneath woolExpose the sheepWhose leg you pull
***
At night the states I forget them or I wish I was there           in that one under the Stars. It smells like June in this night           so sweet like air. I may have decided that the           States are not that tired Or I have thought so. I have           thought that. At night the states And the world not that tired           of everyone Maybe. Honey, I think that to           say is in light. Or whoever. We will           never replace you. We will never re-           place You. But in like a dream the floor is no             longer discursive To me it doesn’t please me by           being the vistas out my window, do you know what           Of course (not) I mean? I have no dreams of wake-           fulness. In wakefulness. And so to begin.           (my love.) At night the states talk. My initial continuing contr-           diction my love for you & that for me deep down in the Purple Plant the oldest           dust of it is sweetest but states no longer           how I would feel. Shirt that shirt has been in your arms           And I have that shirt is how I feel At night the states will you continue in this as-           sociation of matters, my Dearest? down           the street from where the public plaque reminds           that of private loving the consequential chain           trail is matters At night the states that it doesn’t matter that I don’t           say them, remember them at the end of this claustro-           phobic the dance, I wish I could see I wish           I could dance her. At this night the states           say them out there. That I am, am them           indefinitely so and so wishful passive historic fated           and matter- simple, matter-simple, an           eyeful. I wish but I don’t and little melody.           Sorry that these little things don’t happen any           more. The states have drained their magicks           for I have not seen them. Best not to tell. But           you you would always remain, I             trust, as I will always be alone. At night the states whistle. Anyone can live. I can. I am not doing any-           thing doing this. I discover I love as I figure. Wed-           nesday I wanted to say something in           particular. I have been where. I have seen it. The God           can. The people do some more. At night the states I let go of, have let, don’t           let Some, and some, in Florida, doing.           What takes you so long? I am still with you in that           part of the park, and vice will continue, but           I’ll have a cleaning Maine. Who loses           these names loses. I can’t bring it up yet,           keeping my opinions to herself. Everybody in           any room is a smuggler. I walked fiery and             talked in the stars of the automatic weapons           and partly for you Which you. You know. At night the states have told it already. Have           told it. I know it. But more that they           don’t know, I know it too. At night the states whom I do stand before in           judgment, I think that they will find           me fair, not that they care in fact nor do           I, right now though indeed I am they and           we say that not that I’ve           erred nor lost my way though perhaps           they did (did they) and now he is dead           but you you are not. Yet I am this           one, lost again? lost & found by one-           self Who are you to dare sing to me? At night the states accompany me while I sit here           or drums there are always drums what for           so I won’t lose my way the name of           a personality, say, not California           I am not sad for you though I could be           I remember climbing up a hill under tall           trees getting home. I was going to say that the air was           fair (I was always saying something like           that) but that’s not it now, and that           that’s not it isn’t it either At night the states dare sing to me they who seem           tawdry any more I’ve not thought I           loved them, only you it’s you whom I love the states are not good to me as           I am to them though perhaps I am not when I think of your being           so beautiful but is that your beauty           or could it be theirs I’m having such a           hard time remembering any of their names your being beautiful belongs           to nothing I don’t believe they should           praise you but I seem to believe they           should somehow let you go At night the states and when you go down to           Washington witness how perfectly anything           in particular sheets of thoughts what a waste           of sheets at night. I remember something           about an up-to-date theory of time. I           have my own white rose for I have           done something well but I’m not           clear what it is. Weathered, perhaps           but that’s never done. What’s done is           perfection. At night the states ride the train to Baltimore we will try to acknowledge what was but that’s not the real mirror           is it? nor is it empty, or only my eyes           are Ride the car home from Washington           no they are not. Ride the subway           home from Pennsylvania Station. The states           are blind eyes stony smooth shut in moon-           light. My French is the shape of this           book that means I. At night the states the 14 pieces. I couldn’t just walk on by. Why aren’t they beautiful enough in a way that does not           beg to wring something from a dry (wet)           something Call my name At night the states making life, not explaining anything but all the popular songs say call           my name oh call my name, and if I call           it out myself to you, call mine out instead as our           poets do will you still walk on by? I           have loved you for so long. You           died and on the wind they sang           your name to me but you said nothing. Yet you           said once before and there it is, there, but it is           so still. Oh being alone I call out my           name and once you did and do still in           a way you do call out your name to these states whose way is to walk on by that’s why I write too much At night the states whoever you love that’s who you           love the difference between chaos and           star I believe and in that difference they believed           in some funny way but that wasn’t           what I I believed that out of this           fatigue would be born a light, what is fatigue there is a man whose face           changes continually but I will never, something           I will never with regard to it or           never regard I will regard yours tomorrow I will wear purple will I and call my name At night the states you who are alive, you who are dead when I love you alone all night and           that is what I do until I could never write from your           being enough I don’t want that trick of making           it be coaxed from the words not tonight I want it           coaxed from myself but being not that. But I’d           feel more comfortable about it being words           if it were if that’s what it were for these           are the States where what words are true           are words Not myself. Montana, Illinois.           Escondido.
***
After my father’s cremation, my sisters and I agreed to bury him privately when the ground thawed. One will plant a flowering tree, one see to the stone and its cutting, one call the grave digger and the town clerk. It’ll be just us, the daughters, presiding over ashes that could be any mammal’s, or those of any love dispersible by wind. Let’s bury the secret violence to his dogs, Pompey and Tara, Juba and Molly, their ashes already gone to this ground. And his “escapades,” as Mom called them. Here withers that branch of the tree. Let’s bury the ring inscribed In perpetuum ave atque vale (translated “Hail and farewell” by my father, “Hello, and good-bye forever” by Mom, a token dating back to the First Separation) and a tennis ball for canine shades. Your dad is with his dogs now, said more than one person at the funeral. It’ll be just us, the three inheritors, on a raw windy day in Death’s kingdom, lifting our eyes from the hole to the mountains hazed with spring, saying, In perpetuum ave atque vale, minor god of our father. Let’s each of us drop a few dog biscuits into his grave.
***
Crouched before dismantled guns, we found war souvenirs our uncle padlocked in the attic, a brittle latch easily pried off. Stiff uniforms on top, snapshots of soldiers young as our cousins, a velvet box of medals as if he fought all battles in World War II. Bayonets, machetes, a folded flag, two hand grenades with missing pins. We picked up teeth like pennies, loose, as if tossed in, a piece of something dark and waxy like a fig, curved like a question mark, a human ear. We touched dried pieces of cloth stuck to curved bones and held them to the light, turning them over and over, wondering how did uncles learn to kill, what would happen when we grew up.
***
Barbed wires on rusted nails can’t hold lone bulls at home when they smell pasture. They thrust their bone skulls under barbs, tongues quivering for a taste of strange and shove until the post gives way. Days later, we find wires sagging, reset the post, and tighten bent wires like a fiddle and rope the worn-out bull, wishing there was only a fence between us and our heart’s desire. But something with spurs and a rope would find us, cursing and yelling on horseback, cutting us from escape down arroyos, dragging us frothing and wild-eyed back to the sun-bleached yellow range, the same whirlpool of buzzards.
***
At the carnival, Robo-Boy sees only things he recognizes. The Ferris Wheel is an overgrown version of his own bells and whistle eyes. His Flashers, his mother calls them. The Tilt-A-Whirl is the angle his head tilts when the Flirt Program goes into effect, usually in the vicinity of a Cindy or a Carrie, though once he found himself tilting at the school librarian which caused him to wheel in reverse into the Civil War section knocking over a cart of books that were waiting to be shelved under B. There’s a dangerously low stratosphere of pink cotton-candy clouds being carried around by the children. If Robo-Boy goes near them, the alarms will go off. It’s the kind of sticky that would cause joint-lock for sure. In a darker, safer corner Robo-Boy finds the Whack-A-Mole game. He pays a dollar and starts whacking the plastic moles on their heads each time they pop up from the much-dented log. He wins bear after bear. It’s only when he's lugging them home, the largest one skidding face-down along the sidewalk getting dirt on its white nose and light blue belly, that he remembers the program: Wac-A-Mole Realism™—the disc on the installer’s desk. Suddenly it all fits together: the way a deliciously strange thought will start wafting out of his unconscious—and then WHAM, it disappears.
***
Death by over-seasoning: Herbicide Death by annoyance: Pesticide Death by suffocation: Carbon monoxide Death by burning: Firecide Death by falling: Cliffcide Death by hiking: Trailcide Death by camping: Campcide Death by drowning:       Rivercide                                   Lakecide                                   Oceancide Death from puking: Curbcide Death from boredom: Hearthcide Death at the hands of the medical profession: Dockcide Death from an overnight stay: Inncide Death by suprise: Backcide Death by blow to the head: Upcide Death from delirious voting: Rightcide Death from hounding: Leftcide Death through war: Theircide & Ourcide Death by penalty: Offcide Death following a decision: Decide
***
The show did not start off auspiciously, the contestants were nervous and kept fiddling with the wires attached to their privates, the men being especially anxious over the question of balls. The women were more querulous. The first question, a medical subject, was why had the anti-abortionists not mentioned, let alone commented on, the Baboon Heart transplant? One terrified contestant guessed it was because the moral majority’s nervous concern with evolution precluded their bringing it up. That hopeful contestant’s face reflected the malicious light in the eyes of the host who immediately threw the switch A powerful surge shot through the wires and both sexes screamed and writhed, to the delight of the vast viewership, estimated at 100 million, all of whom, presumably, were delighted not to be on the show, because not one in a million knew the answer.
***
America is inconceivable without drugs and always has been. One of the first acts was to dump the tea. The drug that furnished the mansions of Virginia was tobacco, a drug now in much disrepute. Sassafras, a cure-all, is what they came for and they dealt it by the bale altho it was only a diaphoretic to make you perspire— people were so simple in those days. The Civil War saw the isolation of morphine making amputation a pleasure and making the block of wood between the teeth, which was no drug, obsolete. Morphinism was soon widespread among doctors and patients. At this date interns, the reports tell us, are among the premier drug ab/users of said moralistic nation. “Rock” stars (who notoriously “have” doctors) consume drugs by the metric ton even as they urge teenagers to Say No. The undercurrent of American history has been the running aches and pains of the worn path to the door of the apothecary to fetch cannabis and cocaine elixirs by the gallon. It has been all prone all seeking Florida, Ponce de León was just the beginning of a statistical curve whose only satisfaction would be total vertigo. His eager search for youth has become our frantic tilt with death and boredom, in fact we are farming death in Florida with far greater profit than we are farming food in Iowa—elixirs are as multiform as the life-style frauds we implore, a cultural patchwork fit for a fool in the only country in the world with a shop called the Drug Store.
***
A little girl made of sugar and spice and everything nice was eaten by someone with a sweet tooth the size of an elephant’s tusk.          Ah, he said, this darn tooth, it’s driving me nuts.          Then another voice is heard. It’s the little girl’s father who says, have you seen a little girl made of sugar and spice and everything nice?--Incidentally, what’s that thing sticking out of your mouth like an elephant’s tusk?          My sweet tooth, and it’s really driving me nuts.          You ought to see a dentist.          But he might want to pull it, and I don’t like people pulling at me. If they want to pull they should pull at their own pullables.          So true, said the little girl’s father, people should pull at their own pullables and let other people's pullables alone. But still, he asked again, I wonder if you’ve seen a little girl made of sugar and spice and everything nice?
***
Hot sun, cool fire, tempered with sweet air, Black shade, fair nurse, shadow my white hair. Shine, sun; burn, fire; breathe, air, and ease me; Black shade, fair nurse, shroud me and please me. Shadow, my sweet nurse, keep me from burning; Make not my glad cause cause of mourning.     Let not my beauty’s fire     Inflame unstaid desire,     Nor pierce any bright eye     That wandereth lightly. 
***
Some students were stretching a professor on a medieval torture rack. He had offered himself to show them how an academic might be stretched beyond his wildest dreams like a piece of chewing gum.          And as they turned the wheel the professor was getting longer and longer.          Don’t make me too long, or I’ll look kind of goofy, sighed the professor as he grew longer and longer.          Suddenly something snaps.          What happened? sighs the professor from the rack.          We were just stretching an academic when suddenly something snapped; you may have heard it ...          Yes, I was there. Don’t you remember? sighs the professor.          And then we heard an academic sigh ...          Yes, I heard it, too, sighs the professor, it seemed to come from the rack where I was being stretched beyond my wildest dreams like a piece of chewing gum ...
***
They have little use. They are best as objects of torment.          No government cares what you do with them.          Like birds, and yet so human . . .          They mate by briefly looking at the other.          Their eggs are like white jellybeans.          Sometimes they have been said to inspire a man to do more with his life than he might have.          But what is there for a man to do with his life?          . . . They burn beautifully with a blue flame.          When they cry out it is like the screech of a tiny hinge; the cry of a bat. No one hears it . . .
***
When the plowblade struck   An old stump hiding under   The soil like a beggar’s   Rotten tooth, they swarmed up   & Mister Jackson left the plow   Wedged like a whaler’s harpoon.   The horse was midnight   Against dusk, tethered to somebody’s   Pocketwatch.  He shivered, but not   The way women shook their heads   Before mirrors at the five   & dime—a deeper connection   To the low field’s evening star.   He stood there, in tracechains,   Lathered in froth, just   Stopped by a great, goofy   Calmness.  He whinnied   Once, & then the whole   Beautiful, blue-black sky   Fell on his back.
***
john   lord knows you still vexed   reckon me too if my wife stole off durin sleepy night   god an de devil only souls up at dat hour even if i knows she bout to be sold south   even if i knows she was leevin   an you did   you so troubled when i talk about leevin call me a fool   call me cudjo   five years wid you john   yo wife bout to be sold away   jus cus you free dis don’t worry you none you laugh   dunno if i’d miss yo laugh if i was in de south tho thank ya jesus gotta room in philadelphia john   aint big but clean nuf room for us   some chirren too   yo baby   i aint too old jus yet jus round thirty-one   i think   make us a home john    one   where we’s both free   free from de lash’s shadow free like de lord mean   got dis suit fo ya john   aint nobody worn dese clothes befo walk proud in dese clothese   dese is free mans cloths
***
dis suit of clothes jus as empty as a sky wid no stars two years a workin   savin money den   john drop out my heart i dont want ta see his wife i knows dat she is me i’se could go in   shootin de rifle let my angry run free bes not   just my temper risin no use stoking dead fire but ta see his face one mo time now lord   jus you on high if he make do widout me now i can make do lord   i can make do
***
I am unjust, but I can strive for justice.My life’s unkind, but I can vote for kindness.I, the unloving, say life should be lovely.I, that am blind, cry out against my blindness.Man is a curious brute—he pets his fancies—Fighting mankind, to win sweet luxury.So he will be, though law be clear as crystal,Tho’ all men plan to live in harmony.Come, let us vote against our human nature,Crying to God in all the polling placesTo heal our everlasting sinfulnessAnd make us sages with transfigured faces.
***
1 The lean hands of wagon men put out pointing fingers here, picked this crossway, put it on a map,  set up their sawbucks, fixed their shotguns, found a hitching place for the pony express, made a hitching place for the iron horse, the one-eyed horse with the fire-spit head, found a homelike spot and said, “Make a home,”  saw this corner with a mesh of rails, shuttling        people, shunting cars, shaping the junk of        the earth to a new city. The hands of men took hold and tugged And the breaths of men went into the junk And the junk stood up into skyscrapers and asked: Who am I? Am I a city? And if I am what is my name? And once while the time whistles blew and blew again The men answered: Long ago we gave you a name, Long ago we laughed and said: You? Your name is Chicago. Early the red men gave a name to the river,         the place of the skunk,         the river of the wild onion smell,         Shee-caw-go.  Out of the payday songs of steam shovels,  Out of the wages of structural iron rivets,  The living lighted skyscrapers tell it now as a name,  Tell it across miles of sea blue water, gray blue land: I am Chicago, I am a name given out by the breaths of working men,         laughing men, a child, a belonging.  So between the Great Lakes,  The Grand De Tour, and the Grand Prairie,  The living lighted skyscrapers stand, Spotting the blue dusk with checkers of yellow,        streamers of smoke and silver,         parallelograms of night-gray watchmen,  Singing a soft moaning song: I am a child, a belonging.   6 The wheelbarrows grin, the shovels and the mortar        hoist an exploit.  The stone shanks of the Monadnock, the Transportation,         the People’s Gas Building, stand up and scrape        at the sky.  The wheelbarrows sing, the bevels and the blueprints        whisper.  The library building named after Crerar, naked        as a stock farm silo, light as a single eagle        feather, stripped like an airplane propeller,        takes a path up.  Two cool new rivets says, “Maybe it is morning.”        “God knows.” Put the city up; tear the city down;        put it up again; let us find a city. Let us remember the little violet-eyed        man who gave all, praying, “Dig and        dream, dream and hammer, till your        city comes.” Every day the people sleep and the city dies;        every day the people shake loose, awake and        build the city again. The city is a tool chest opened every day,        a time clock punched every morning,        a shop door, bunkers and overalls        counting every day. The city is a balloon and a bubble plaything        shot to the sky every evening, whistled in        a ragtime jig down the sunset. The city is made, forgotten, and made again,        trucks hauling it away haul it back        steered by drivers whistling ragtime        against the sunsets. Every day the people get up and carry the city,        carry the bunkers and balloons of the city,        lift it and put it down.                “I will die as many times                as you make me over again,                says the city to the people, I am the woman, the home, the family, I get breakfast and pay the rent; I telephone the doctor, the milkman, the undertaker;        I fix the streets        for your first and your last ride— Come clean with me, come clean or dirty, I am stone and steel of your sleeping numbers;        I remember all you forget.        I will die as many times        as you make me over again.” Under the foundations,  Over the roofs,  The bevels and the blueprints talk it over.  The wind of the lake shore waits and wanders.  The heave of the shore wind hunches the sand piles. The winkers of the morning stars count out cities And forget the numbers.  
***
Tomb of a millionaire,A multi-millionaire, ladies and gentlemen,Place of the dead where they spend every yearThe usury of twenty-five thousand dollarsFor upkeep and flowersTo keep fresh the memory of the dead.The merchant prince gone to dustCommanded in his written willOver the signed name of his last testamentTwenty-five thousand dollars be set asideFor roses, lilacs, hydrangeas, tulips,For perfume and color, sweetness of remembranceAround his last long home.(A hundred cash girls want nickels to go to the movies to-night.In the back stalls of a hundred saloons, women are at tablesDrinking with men or waiting for men jingling loose silver dollars in their pockets.In a hundred furnished rooms is a girl who sells silk or dress goods or leather stuff for six dollars a week wagesAnd when she pulls on her stockings in the morning she is reckless about God and the newspapers and the police, the talk of her home town or the name people call her.)
***
When first the apprizing eye and tongue that muttered (Banished from Eden’s air? Or pride of apes?) Sat clinking flint on flint, as they shattered Snatched with a grin what fell in craftier shapes, The law was move or die. Lively from tigers; Dainty on deer. As weather called the tune. Oxen, we learned, would bear us. So would rivers. And that was science. On the whole a boon. What caveman on a round rock dumped a-grunting Rubbed at a rueful hip, brow darkening why? Or gaped at boulders over gravel shifting Until—a splendor of wheel-thought like sunrise! No wonder: such example in a heaven Revving immaculate gears, and at his feet The planet on her axle greased and even. Put any wheel to earth, and two wheels meet. Athens cut ruts of marble; ivory courses Caromed Apollo’s car of talkative gold.  And Donne saw wagon-ways. The horsepower: horse Over the flats of Kansas sail-cars rolled.  First planks on querulous ground, then treads of met Steel set edgewise, over stone for ties.  A mountain? Sawtooth rail or crank-and-cable Till iron took serene the incredulous rise.  Compleat with a nifty moniker, Puffing Billy,  Best Friend of Charleston, Wabash Cannonball, Cycloped***
It seems so—          I don’t know.  It seems   as if the end of the world   has never happened in here.   No smoke, no   dizzy flaring except   those candles you can light   in the chapel for a quarter.   They last maybe an hour   before burning out.                               And in this room   where we wait, I see   them pass, the surgical folk—     nurses, doctors, the guy who hangs up   the blood drop—ready for lunch,   their scrubs still starched into wrinkles,   a cheerful green or pale blue,   and the end of a joke, something   about a man who thought he could be—    what?  I lose it   in their brief laughter.
***
A slow news day, but I did like the obit about the butcher   who kept the same store for fifty years.   People remembered   when his street was sweetly roaring, aproned   with flower stalls and fish stands.   The stock market wandered, spooked by presidential winks,   by micro-winds and the shadows of earnings.   News was stationed   around the horizon, ready as summer clouds to thunder--    but it moved off and we covered the committee meeting   at the back of the statehouse, sat around on our desks,   then went home early.   The birds were still singing,   the sun just going down.   Working these long hours,   you forget how beautiful the early evening can be,   the big houses like ships turning into the night,   their rooms piled high with silence.
***
His head rose like a torch in a tomb. Banquet-style, as at a second Symposium, The others lounged on couches or lay knocked out. A net of shadows dangled from wire-meshed windows. Buffeted there, there, some swam against currents Or were swept off into underwater canyons. Visitors, confusion streaming over them, speech Foaming into eddies, words lolling like jetsam On the lightless bottom, listened to the news Of minds crammed in bodies: Here, all was stoic Or hectic or unspeaking disconnection. Moving shadows on the TV screen implied A world out there, though a world more couth, More uncouth? in four o’clock’s slushy freezing dark: Plato’s cave loomed in semblance of the walls, Only wasn’t it the cave as All, no outside Not inside, nothing more real to go out into? He peered far down to where dark swam up From the depthless screen and hovered poised Above dark-in-light: Sergeant Schultz kept repeating, “I know nothing, nothing,” his funny-Nazi German accent As he recoils from his ever sauve tormentor, the American POW Colonel Hogan who threatens Schultz With good-humored ruthlessness as bad as a mother In a supermarket aisle cajoling her greedy-eyed child, “Ah ah ah—remember the Russian front!” —Poor Schultz’s accent making him more human in his terror, Though only an actor acting his lines through The canned laughter’s bacchic furor sweeping down The corridor to die in murmurs of slippers shushing. Cast yourself in it, imagine having to say those lines, Not just now, but always, eternity a chaos Of laugh-track frenzy more demonic than funny, Reruns of Hogan haunted by the actor Who acts Hogan’s lines, his real-life orgies Before a secret camera ending in his Glogotha, His infamy to be bludgeoned and found wrapped Naked in a shower curtain that hangs In the mind like the cave’s walls turning outside Inside outside inside no end or difference inside out —The almost see-through membrane of a world gone flat: He hunches forward to change the channel. Muttering something to Schultz’s “I know nothing, nothing,” A grim joke maybe, “Ain’t that the truth...” though really, Who could know what words he was or wasn’t Answering, who can hear above the roar of Earth moving under him, trying to throw him off As he clings to the sofa hurtling through space! And as he clings, the screen slowly opens and fans out wide Around the National Broadcasting Corporation peacock Waving its plumes, flaming blues, greens, radiant vermilions, Brilliance of the seasons, late-morning pastels Easy and restful for the brain and eye, Sempiternal hues Atlantis rose up and sank back into. And these feather off into grays, solid wintry Grays that give off nothing and reflect nothing back.
***
After lockdown, tier by tier undresses to sleep: Each skull nestles in its mattress-hollow. Wall facing wall inside of wall shrinks to a keyhole: A fly creeps through and starts to buzz, reeling through bars Down steel corridors. A dreamer’s eye follows the fly, And wherever the fly lands, the eye touches down With an airier Midas touch that turns all to glass: The eye wakes to Bentham’s panopticon, glazed cage Of an inspection house where only the Warden sees all. —I am asleep and not asleep, I stare up into faces swarming: Cellblocks of memory focus face by face, Mine flitting in and out of theirs: In prison issue They come, footsteps mingling over mine in a child’s game Of chase from yard to cell, only we’re all grown men, Meatier, less and more malign than A boy’s imagining himself grown... —I was asleep and not asleep, Faces came and went. Frank the Joker, the West Virginia biker, who composed “A rhyme to fit the crime”: “There was a young fellow named Frank Who gave his girlfriend a spank; She fell in a heap In front of Frank’s jeep And old Frank ran her down for a prank.” Or the white-haired lifer, densley oracular: “Sometimes, after lockdown, your thoughts Just don’t have the energy to climb the wall.” The Giggler who bolted His brother in a barn and burned it down, Eyes challenging, sly: “They killed this guy and see, I think this is funny, hilarious In fact, but you, you won’t think so—they cut off his dick And shoved it in his mouth.” Or the child molester who said about flowers At funerals: “They’re there, aren’t they, To hide the stink off the corpse?” Or Pat, armed robber Who held aloof: Rolled shirtsleeves, forearms Carved from basalt, smoke rings Lazily effusing: “The johns here, they got no doors: You ever try to take a shit while someone’s watching? It took six months to get used to that— But here, man, the bars feed on Time, they nibble It to nothing.” —I wanted to sleep and couldn’t sleep, I stared up into faces swarming. Three o’clock dark dissolves The walls, faces start to drift, their atoms Mix with concrete’s Atomic swirl, bodies get stuck Floating halfway through, heartbeats Booming as through a stethoscope: Like Michaelangelo’s slaves, if a fly Landed on their noses, They couldn’t lift a hand to brush it off. Dark velleities buzz in this hive of steel Where power handshakes Flower in forests Of interlocking fingers: In red prison uniform, a man On death row, convicted 1984, exonerated and pardoned October 2000 (New York Times, Dec. 10): “You could hear the humming of the chair Every time they cut it on, like an air-conditioner Cutting on. My daddy came to see me, he said, ‘What's that?’ I said, ‘The chair.’ The way they put it, they got to test the chair.” —I was asleep And couldn’t wake up. Inside my skull, glass Keeps shattering: Dream-beings Unsubscribed to the will, with insect bodies And human heads, dash against walls, mammal softness Of cheeks and lips join with stingers Pulsing...my eyes awake and not awake, where is the chamber As in the horror movie Return of the Fly that, circuitry and test-tubes Sparking, would unscramble these divided Natures? (They called me “Teach” As in “Hey, Teach, how do you spell...” When I confessed I’d been in jail, they looked disappointed in me: Their side of the wall was theirs, not mine.) —I tried to turn over, to look away, But couldn’t wake up, couldn’t not wake. Chemicals drip into a man’s veins, one each For heart, lungs, brain. Strapped to a table, he stares Impassive, eyes flickering shut, body A meat wall, IV tubes Almost empty... —I was asleep and not asleep, I couldn’t move to wake. I hear shrill wings—that fly inspecting bread crumbs Under dining hall tables while the Warden blares Descartes over the Intercom: “If a man’s head were lopped off His mouth would keep on moving, faultlessly Justifying his crimes.” But that fly, that speck against Steel, its wings steered in ways that seem crazy To eyes awake, not awake, Not seeing, all-seeing, the head unmoving Moving to turn away...oh seely fly I can’t not see, can’t move to brush away From my unsleeping eyes, you veer In spirals unflattened into pathos Of careening chaos, your eccentric Flight path darts Through bars, oh alas, hairy Vibrant fly!
***
I / omen What was going on in the New York American Black/red/green helmeted neon night? The elevator door was closing behind us, we were the ones Plunging floor after floor after floor after floor   To the abyss—but it was someone else’s face Staring from the screen out at us, someone else’s face Saying something flashing from the teleprompter: Though what the face said was meant to reassure, Down in the abyss the footage kept playing, All of it looping back like children chanting The answers to nonsensical riddles, taunting A classmate who doesn’t know the question: “Because it’s too far to walk” “Time to get a new fence” “A big red rock eater.” And as the images rewound And the face kept talking, the clear night sky Filled up with smoke and the smoke kept puring Itself out into the air like a voice saying something It can’t stop saying, some murky omen Like schoolkids asking: “Why do birds fly south?” “What time is it when an elephant sits on the fence?” “What’s big, red and eats rocks?”     2 / in front of st. vincent’s A woman hugging another woman Who was weeping blocked the sidewalk. Nobody moved for a moment. They were an island caught at the tide turning: Such misery in two human bodies. Then the wearing away of the crowd Moving flowed over them and they   Were pulled swiftly along down the sidewalk.     3 / joke Faces powdered with dust and ash, there they were In the fast food place, raucous and wild, splitting The seams of their work clothes, weary to hysteria As they hunched in their booth next to the buffet Under heat lamps reflecting incarnadine Off pastas and vegetable slag. Then the joke Ignited, they quivered on the launch pad, Laughter closed around them, they couldn’t Breathe, it was as if they were staring out From a space capsule porthole and were asking The void an imponderable riddle While orbiting so high up in space That the earth was less than the least hint Of light piercing the smoke-filled, cloudless night. (What was the joke about? Nobody knew.) And then they stopped laughing and stared into their plates, Ash smearing down their faces as they chewed.     4 / spell spoken by suppliant to helios for knowledge                          from the Greek Magical Papyri Under my tongue is the mud of the Nile, I wear the baboon hide of sacred Keph. Dressed in the god’s power, I am the god, I am Thouth, discoverer of healing drugs, Founder of letters. As god calls on god I summon you to come to me, you Under the earth; arouse yourself for me, Great daimon, you the subterranean, You of the primordial abyss. Unless you tell me what I want to know, What is in the minds of everyone, Egyptians, Greeks, Syrians, Ethiopians, of every race And people, unless I know what has been And what shall be, unless I know their skills And practices and works and lives and names Of them and their fathers and mothers And brothers and friends, even of those now dead, I will pour the blood of the black-faced jackal As an offering in a new-made jar and put it In the fire and burn beneath it what’s left Of the bones of all-praised Osiris, And I will shout in the port of Busiris The secrets of his mysteries, that his body, Drowned, remained in the river three days And three nights, that he, the praised one, Was carried by the river into the sea And surrounded by wave on wave on wave And by mist rising off water through the air. To keep your belly from being eaten by fish, To keep the fish from chewing your flesh with their mouths, To make the fish close their hungry jaws, to keep The fatherless child from being taken From his mother, to keep the pole of the sky From being brought down and the twin towering Mountains from toppling into one, to keep Anoixis From running amok and doing just what she wants, Not god or goddess will give oracles Until I know through and through Just what is in the minds of all human beings, Egyptians, Syrians, Greeks, Ethyopians, of every race And people, so that those who come to me. Their eyes and mine can meet in a level gaze, Neither one or the other higher or lower, And whether they speak or keep silent, I can tell them whatever has happened And is happening and is going to happen To them, and I can tell them their skills And their works and their names and those of their dead, And of every human being who comes to me I will read them as I read a sealed letter And tell them everything truthfully.     5 / from brooklyn bridge Sun shines on the third bridge tower: A garbage scow ploughs the water, Maternal hull pushing is all out beyond The city, pushing it all out so patiently— All you could hear out there this flawless afternoon Is the sound of sand pulverizing newsprint To tatters, paper-pulp ripping crosswise Or lengthwise, shearing off some photo Of maybe a head or maybe an arm. Ridiculous flimsy noble newspaper, Leaping in wind, fluttering, collapsing, Its columns sway and topple into babble: All you’d see if you were out there Is air vanishing into clearer air.     6 / from the plane Pressed against our seats, them released to air, From the little plane windows we peered four thousand feet Down to the ground desert-gray and still, Nothing seeming to be moving on that perfect afternoon, No reminder of why it was we were all looking, Remembering maybe the oh so flimsy Wooden sawhorse police barricades, as the woman In front of me twisted her head back to see It all again, but up there there was nothing to see, Only the reef water feel of transparency Deepening down to a depth where everything Goes dark and nothing moves unless it belongs To that dark, darting in and out or undulating Slowly or cruising unblinking, jaws open or closed.     7 / spell broken by suppliant to helios for protection                    from the Greek Magical Papyri This is the charm that will protect you, the charm That you must wear: Onto lime wood write With vermilion the secret name, name of The fifty magic letters. Then say the words: “Guard me from every daimon of the air, On the earth and under the earth, guard me From every angel and phantom, every Ghostly visitation and enchantment, Me, your suppliant.” Enclose it in a skin Dyed purple, hang it round your neck and wear it.     8 / roll of film: photographer missing Vines of smoke through latticework of steel Weave the air into a garden of smoke. And in the garden people came and went, People of smoke and people of flesh, the air dressed In ash. What the pictures couldn’t say Was spoken by the smoke: A common language In a tongue of smoke that murmured in every ear Something about what it was they’d been forced To endure: Words spoken in duress, Inconsolable words, words spoken under the earth That rooted in smoke and breathed in the smoke And put forth shoots that twined through the steel, Words plunged through the roof of the garages’ Voids, I-beams twisted; the eye that saw all this Tells and tells again one part of the story Of that day of wandering through the fatal garden, The camera’s eye open and acutely Recording in the foul-smelling air.     9 / lamentation on ur                                from a Sumerian spell, 2000 B.C. Like molten bronze and iron shed blood           pools. Our country’s dead melt into the earth           as grease melts in the sun, men whose helmets now lie scattered, men annihilated by the double-bladed axe. Heavy, beyond           help, they lie still as a gazelle exhausted in a trap,           muzzle in the dust. In home after home, empty doorways frame the absence of mothers and fathers who vanished           in the flames remorselessly spreading claiming even           frightened children who lay quiet in their mother’s arms, now borne into oblivion, like swimmers swept out to sea           by the surging current. May the great barred gate           of blackest night again swing shut on silent hinges. Destroyed in its turn, may this disaster too be torn out of mind.
***
Branching the way blind fingers splay across The face they’re reading, trees trace the backyard Ditch sop that their shadows drop off into Space,            an abyss where I hear a neighbor boy’s Voice cursing an exhilarated, out of its mind,           Unappeasably inventive flow of “Fuck fuck motherfuck” ecstasy that maybe He imagines the neighborhood can't hear?—                                                                or is his tongue wired To some source of inspired but as yet unknown Intelligence that radiates from all of us and he           Is its mouthpiece, speaking it to the trees That screen him from me listening to his Unrelenting arias, predestined like birdsong Flowing unbidden, of four-letter almost Erotic keening over something I know too,           Everybody knows?—                                        and even if all it is Is the “fuck fuck motherfuck” ecstasy Of April budding in his mouth and sending down Roots to some anti-self that sprouts and shadows Him as it croons and shouts the song of its difference—           Even then, this Billy whom I don’t think twice about When we meet in the alley and slap palms Or I see him playing alone on the swings of big kids’ slide, Even then is he the vessel                                           of some signal that uses us, Down in the abyss irradiating him so that just this instant           Whatever that other uses him for he can’t resist: His voice an instrument of blissed-out torment Until that grip flings him loose— Who knows which of us it chooses to penetrate Next, making us suddenly sweat or shiver, That influence bathing everything budding                                                              in profane rays.
***
This prairie holds us with its plainness. An ugly wife. We would not stay but children comfort us and we need this flatness. On our table a carp with a tumor on its lip, larva eating its side. An old man laughs, one silver tooth in his head like a galvanized watertank. We are driven back into the land, our raccoon faces banded around the eyes with motorcycle goggles. Every car we had rusting in the yard. We saddle the buffalo and say we are captives. This barrenness holds us down like a wife.
***
Hunted and sung unhunted / unsung clump of loghouse / chaxed hill unuttered / unstrung clistered bow hunted and unsung hunted / strung hunted / sung.
***
The t(rain) again this morning, sky always gray, grain cars f(lying) like blackbirds with fieldseed in their bellies. The eight o five carrying g(rain) sings like tribes when they migrated north in summer across the plains following tracks of herds. High water into trees. The lake full of rain. We say it is someone else pushing down on the lake to make it spill over its edge. While we wait the woman earth sings with the tribes, transforms herself into all things. After the train b(rush) burning, the delay of smoke in the car comes after we have passed like sound. Rain hangs fringe from earth woman’s dress. She holds the delay of truth until it comes from our mouths. Coyotes sleep on her lap, birds fly into the b(ranches) of her hair while farther down the road the black snake train wiggles behind her ear.
***
I. We hang clothes on the line. His wide trousers and shirt, wind-beat, roar small thunder from one prairie cloud. The same rapple of flag on its pole. Half in fear, half in jest, we laugh. He calls us crow women. Our black hair shines in the sun and in the light from school windows. He drives his car to town, upsets the dust on buckboard hills. We sit on the fence when he is gone. Does he know we speak of thunder in his shirts? We cannot do well in his school. He reads from west to east, The sun we follow moves the other way. Crowbar. Our eyes come loose from words on the page in narrow rooms of the reservation school. He perceives and deciphers at once. For us written letters will not stay on the page, but fall like crows from the sky and hit against the glass windows of the school. Our day is night when we sit in rows of the classroom. Leaves in a whirlwind from sumac groves. Flock of crows are black starts on a white night. II. On the porch of the reservation school the blackbirds walk around our feet, fly into our head. They call our secret name. Dark corridors linger in our mind We whisper the plains to one another. We do not talk of what we cannot understand. Black and white fleckered dresses. Our face like our fathers. The sun is no enemy to the eye looking west. The brush thin as hair of old ones. It blinds the eye, makes fire on fields, flashes against windows like silver ribbons on burial robes. Hot late into the fall, windy, ready for cold to sweep in. The heat seems solid, but totters on the brink of winter. We laugh to ourselves when he returns to the reservation school for girls. Take his clothes from the line. Set the table with salt and pepper, spoon, knives. Cattails and milk-pods in a jar. We get lard from the basement, rub a place in the dusty window like a moon in the ancient sky. III. One hill larger than the others: an old buffalo with heavy head and whiskers nods at the ground, grazes in my dreams, one blade at a time. We stay in our stiff white-sheeted beds in the dormitory room. Buffalo wander in our dreams. White night-dresses. Black pods suspended in sumac groves like crows. In the sweat lodge of sleep we make our vision quest, black as pitch in crevice between crow feathers. We hang his thunder clothes in sleep, arms reach above our beds like willows blowing slowly by the creek. Quietly we choke, hold our wounded arms like papooses. Clothes beat on lines. Sumac groves and whirl of leaves: a shadow of our fathers at council fires. Red leaves, waxy as hay on fields. We dream of schoolrooms. Written letters on the wind. He reads crow-marks on the page but does not know crow.
***
Often the slightest gesture is most telling,As when he reaches tenderly in passing To pluck the yellow leaf from the dark fall Of her hair, or even the absence of all gesture: The way she doesn’t need to turn to know Who, in this gathering of friends, has touched her. It was as if he dreamed some private garden. Perhaps he woke from it, mid-reach, to find His hand too near her hair in this crowded yard, And maybe even now she’s shuttering in (She’s even better than you or I at that) A storm of worry and recrimination— Did anyone notice? how could he do that here!— By seamlessly continuing to tell you About her trip to see her favorite Vermeer This morning in the Delft show at the Met: “So now they say she isn’t weighing pearls Or gold or anything—it’s just the light Gleaming off empty scales.” So much is hard To know for sure. If I confronted her, She’d say it was just a leaf—who could afford To disagree? Could we? Now she’s explaining How the girl faces a mirror we can’t see into And how behind her hangs a gloomy painting Of the Last Judgment: “Over her head God Floats in a cloud,” she says, “like a thought balloon.”   But you don’t hear. You’re watching me. I nod.
***
Dense night is a needs thing. You were lured      in a luminous canoe said to have once ruled     a lunar ocean.     The 2 am soda pour of stars is all but silent; only listen —     sedater than a sauropod     in the bone epics it spills all the moon spice,     releasing a sap odour           that laces      us to a vaster scale          of road opus. A carousel of oral cues, these spinning sonic coins. A slide show of old wishes.
***
Ripeness was a semitone below the bone clef of the elbow keying the rain-slicked cyclone fence: the firm, saclike rind of a warped minim, golden drupe note for which we longed. Stone fruit are fine tutors. This one unseals a sensual nose hit. At dusk they go lambent like chunks of bent gloam. Sucked, their fibrous pith is birth-pouf —  punk oblong pits belonging in a goblin’s pot, infused with rich static and the fresh electric scratchiti of summer lightning. It’s fortune gave us this softer unit, surely. Edgewise the frangipani made a rain-gap fin for heads rife with fire in the shade of the mango belt.
***
I have known these estuaries —  the channels and canals, the backwaters that flush and eddy to the Pacific, I have skimmed that muddied slurry, felt the nip in the throat where the salt in the air is the salt of the coast, I have tacked where the tide is incomplete: no rollers and breakers, only an ebb that rocks the wayfarers —  a rush of silver, the gavel-smack of mullet in the night, mud crabs elbowing denwards under concrete slabs of boat ramps —  I have stalked where herons stilt and spear baitfish in green afternoons, cast crab pots in loose analemmas to watch the black sonar spread, tracked prawn trawlers on the broadwater crawling back in the lavender dawn then sat at the jetty’s edge and shucked those tiger shells, cast sucked heads back into the dark, crushed mussel shell underfoot for the burn of sharpened chitin, stepped where stingrays wallow and idle, shuffling their barbs, waiting to strike. I have spent half my life in low tide —  nights where I have not known if I am contracting or dragging out again, where the movement of the water is the movement of my mind —  unending comings and goings of sounds and narrows, those entry points to my two continents — and my history is the history of currents: a canal small enough to catch a childhood in its net, water vast enough to divide a life.
***
Rock quartz next to a fence with upturned faces. On the hill, on the other side a storm, or plausibly, you. Time keeps its footsteps regular until it is clapped upwards: a falcon glides into view. Dissolving into the pool in a splash of white, I saw you. In summer, the town goes to the drive-in. The edges of the coin keep moving as I stare at images through goggles, they fog out. Rooms go to pieces, sometimes, quietly. Curtains are no longer red, now they’re dusty. The cat moves. The room turns ocher and shifts, as wind blows through. O Brecht’s sky of streaming blue. It’s been days since I opened the book my face is watching. Cupboards slam in another part of the flat. The room reassembles, but it’s different now — outdated.
***
Focus on the taxidermied light, the quarked vehemence of splayed negation, to rags, your britches, seeping glib intent, sight catastrophic, given to seizures. The curlicue scent has not the mother in it. The fall of romance, the hold of the tender new, programs aloft, every nerve to shudder: ghosting monitions of the incomplete. Either will the aching swells, apart from bliss. Coordinates of favor, hip neath fiber strip follicle sheath of slip chord parent display. Sensitized gift wagon fern entrenched, the halo of the nation is the caul-throated blood of hench, rosella’d to the peak of taxonomied childless. Where your mottled hologram, the feathered monster of the throttled. Quizzical with the world, am to console, the hope for saplings edifice disjunction. The dissociated fanfare of motivated loss entrees the ingredient of dining undertaken. Your teeth the grinder, your lips the sensitive house. The beds’ laments’ the reindeers’ horses’ dreams’ in halves’ cameo’d sighs.
***
Emotion scoops the footpath’s velvet edges, estate agents’ bluster calibrates the street’s livability, treeless, ajar with fridges bunked out. Investors wave sheets of sums to air, a tiny computer chalked on glass, loving the artist’s marble noose in adjacent pop-up gallery they might’ve forked out for, but didn’t. It was no use crying now though her vale of tears candies a conquest, with stuck name tag and good insurance that barely cost a sou. A countdown into space echoes, blue lorikeets flit the race and pigeons chew the eaves for reassurance over suckling locals and tourist dandies.
***
His sorceries are boo-hooing a teller, what’s spare’s on the local trots better than breakfast. A win’s the Seychelles or the gurgling Maldives. Going fast. Where the pig-footed bandicoot, the broad-faced potoroo, the gumnut numbat? spooked, bespoke, honor’s in a trapdoor. He stumped up, but crime befell kismet pardon repelled mores coin begat loss.
***
exploring the farm as a child I would part the tall grasses, moving through the dirt beneath the thick rushes. consisting mainly of overgrown clover and clusters of foliage, I’d map the distance that made up our property. it seemed endless, that innocent drive to run further beneath the ceiling of leaves, expanses of earth shifting beneath a child’s slight weight. I would imagine how far the landscape stretched. one afternoon when my parents were at the races I followed the pasture floor to the fenceline at the back of the property. wanting to go further, I hovered a blade of grass over the ticking wire as I had watched Dad do so many times, to test if it was safe to cross. feeling nothing, I wrapped my hands around one of the copper threads — struck by that first surge through the body, electricity running like a vein of blood beneath the skin as though a voice screamed through a haze, blinding my eyes and rattling my mind with panic. no longer wishing to know more, to understand, I stood startled at the trapped earth and wires that had run a painful electric current through my body. it would have been foolish to even attempt climbing over into the neighboring paddock. all I could do then was give up.
***
My darling turns to poetry at night. What began as flirtation, an aside Between abstract expression and first light Now finds form as a silent, startled flight Of commas on her face — a breath, a word ...     My darling turns to poetry at night. When rain inspires the night birds to create Rhyme and formal verse, stanzas can be made Between abstract expression and first light. Her heartbeat is a metaphor, a late Bloom of red flowers that refuse to fade. My darling turns to poetry at night. I watch her turn. I do not sleep. I wait For symbols, for a sign that fear has died Between abstract expression and first light. Her dreams have night vision, and in her sight Our bodies leave ghostprints on the bed. My darling turns to poetry at night Between abstract expression and first light.
***
Northern hemisphere   it’s almost Christmas. Sunlight   withdrawing into its darkest shell of green coils   ring by ring   like a yellow snake   in a tight burrow. The snake’s sleep   maps an origin   pinpoints the start of where morning lies — its polished skin   a simple clock turning every so often   leaving a scaled   topography behind. But just as rain can fall sideways   and eyes look aslant might a northern winter   not widen light in the same way a snake   exceeds its skin? Last summer   I stood over a sheath of snake   in the bush. The tail tapered   the head was marked   with the shape and angle   of invisible eyes. It could have been a hairnet or a ghost   but it was quieter than that. It could have been laid out   across a plate of vine leaves. A seamstress could have used it as tulle   a fisherman as netting the desert salt   as cracks. Trees are empty on the sidewalk   their fallen leaves   layered and overlapping   like shelves of ancient papyruses. One tree casts a long shadow   two arms striking upwards as though piqued   by pavement light. Between the shadow lying flat and still   and the tree standing long and tall   there is an angle of forty-five degrees. There is Icarus   falling from blue   to decimal   to amber. The distance between north   and south   is mapped with the shape   and angle   of his eyes. The snake’s skin is colorless   his eye invincible. The winter light is warm   piercing darkness   radiating a trajectory that points in all   directions.
***
Love in my bosom like a bee   Doth suck his sweet;Now with his wings he plays with me,   Now with his feet.Within mine eyes he makes his nest,His bed amidst my tender breast;My kisses are his daily feast,And yet he robs me of my rest.   Ah, wanton, will ye?And if I sleep, then percheth he   With pretty flight,And makes his pillow of my knee   The livelong night.Strike I my lute, he tunes the string;He music plays if so I sing;He lends me every lovely thing;Yet cruel he my heart doth sting.   Whist, wanton, still ye!Else I with roses every day   Will whip you hence,And bind you, when you long to play,   For your offense.I’ll shut mine eyes to keep you in,I’ll make you fast it for your sin,I’ll count your power not worth a pin.Alas! what hereby shall I win   If he gainsay me?What if I beat the wanton boy   With many a rod?He will repay me with annoy,   Because a god.Then sit thou safely on my knee,And let thy bower my bosom be;Lurk in mine eyes, I like of thee.O Cupid, so thou pity me,   Spare not, but play thee!
***
How slow an approach when viewed from a distance. How more likely the encounter if the ground is clear A voice saying always “go ahead” calls it freedom Above the 27th parallel is the heat I know as home, in my bones always untouched by city’s cool centrifuge that refracts a kind of light which bursts and vanishes on the spot Heading North, I escape the fray Green hem of the outskirts, roadside façade of forest, hiding a casement of burnt earth, silent as myself Outside, a poet ghosts a window Writing back into life his night parrots. I drive lines from water to water, guzzle roadhouse coffee Warming up, there is a conflict of appetite, a suburban tree, black with cockatoos shucking almonds A dolphin trapped in a rock pool Cane toads storming the Kimberley in wet, find it planted with sugar An olive python curled under a van belly beaded with feral kittens After three days of seated travel I lunge from the car, sprint the length of jetty, deaf to the man screaming warning. Only in midair do I look down to the sea, the time it takes to panic Two yellow-and-black krait, vivid bandwidth of danger, turning on the turquoise surface, and all I can do, is fall
***
Men are hanging themselves unaccompanied by sound in the dark hours before the bottle shop opens Rope snaking a branch of pepper tree at the lodging house Empty tenement. Dark windows bruised by sky lighting rookeries of collapse and fire crumbling out until the whole street is vacant and mud caked In ragged brown of summer verticordia I peed near a midden of fleshy arils heaped at an anthill entrance watched them drag seed deep instilling acacia in dirt Withering of certainty spits hisses The swamps filling with drillholes guarded by adders Air churned with a fierce screaming warra! Warra. Dumbbell of yield and sequence Through years of discipline I learned containment or vice versa as natural as speechlike Upward spiral of spell A nested equivalence this woundedness Pinned fury petering in honeyeater as a falcon plucks its way to the warm core, feathers wafting down to soft eremophila Sentences in the Bible begin with And God As if starting was difficult and well populated An excess of tangle and downcast in need of name The roof rats went quietly once the python escaped to ceiling rafters of my father’s house its coagulation of coils echoing shapes of a nearby bogong moth
***
There was terror already in her love even before she knew for sure her lover was the god. Her forehead skidded a little on the sweat of his chest and close to his ear Semele begged again for proof. And it didn’t feel like a myth or a metaphor to her as she burned up with the brightness she saw.
***
Any, every, thing that was exposed goes underground and is washed into the Tiber. This is what some people do with faces, burying. You see them, the heavy ones, chests like rivers, their heads bowed down with great antlers of thought invisible. After many seasons, the fronts of their bodies terribly developed to carry them. Venus of the Drains, the woman with the scum at the corners of her mouth who talked for a long time, scarred by burning, perilous thin, then told us we had made her day. It is seen, what should not be seen. It is I sees it. Shameful, to feel so heavily the shame of others — to hear and echo that note always waiting in the voice to be sung. Do I make it happen to her by having face and chest that wash with red?
***
She is approaching him, God, he sees her in his eye-edge, a tiny gold speck getting bigger, scintillating. Her beauty lashes him with its sword — but she has heard all this before. She approaches him, the one who killed her, and she reeks of life. He waits for her to dissolve in him, but her grit encircles his teeth. He waits for her to become what he has made her, an angel, passionate and cold as the dawn, quietly encased in power, churning out neutral love and fastened to eternity, backwards and forwards all the days. But the world is tangled in her hair. She is getting closer and her gold beauty is greening, her face is turning furious, fury-like, her death opens around him and he feels a human fear. He cannot match her, she has the reins of creation in her slim white paws, he feels the world creeping away from him. He makes to shove her from heaven, let her slip and slumber through the world. But he cannot grip her. She gleams through him like heaven through a needle.    the stroll  God takes Ezekiel for many walks. He talks about all the things he will do to the people, this and this and this, and then they will know who I am. One day they chance upon a valley of bones splintering and whitening in the sun. Shall these bones live? These bones? Oh Lord. God flings sinew on the bones, liver, spleen, gristle. The bodies rise. Rise without breath, wet clay glistens in the sun. He gives breath, as if an afterthought. Ezekiel tries to see in their eyes, one at a time. The men not moving but lunging forward like warriors, eyes ice cold mud seen through mist, waiting for their souls to snap back in. They are bruised with an ache made not by the world. Their forgotten stories rift their faces, their deaths now a hole they can walk through. Home a space that closed after them, rinsed of the mourning that ran its course. They glimmer in new reality, still speechless, as if they were really the miracle ... But already God has taken Ezekiel by the elbow.
***
He wants to take her where birds grew legs long as rodeos, and a reimagined giant wombat tends to disappoint. He wants to drive her to a desert where they ghosted her in ochre, buried her, standing upright by a milky singing lake. He wants to walk with her along a curve of shattered moon, where human memory unmade her long ago. He wants to wake where sand blows yesterday from her face — where there is nothing but the terror of  his faith.
***
despite the cost a new gaol has been built it seems the incarceration rates are trebling I only came here in the role of a Deaths In Custody inspector all the cells are stark and spotless blank screens watch from the corner the offices have the highest technology the faces of the staff still look the same when I walk down this wing and peer into this filthy room the door closes behind me the feeling in my heart is changing from a proud strength of duty to fear all the stories I have ever heard stand silent in the space beside me —  a coil of rope is being pushed under the door of this cell
***
a whisper arrives. two thousand. two thousand or more. did you hear it? that bomb. the torture of red sand turning green the anguish of earth turned to glass did you hear it? two thousand. two thousand or more yams cremated inside the earth. poison trapped in glass like a museum. did you hear it? two thousand. two thousand or more tears we cried for our Land for the fear you gave us, for the sickness and the dying two thousand years of memory here two thousand. two thousand or more peaceful place this place. happy place till you come with your bombs you stole our happiness with your poison ways you stole our stories two thousand. two thousand or more our people gone missing. did you hear it? where’s my grandfather? you seen him? where’s my daughter? you seen her? Mummy! you seen my mum? Dad! two thousand. two thousand or more times I asked for truth. do you know where they are? two thousand. two thousand or more trees dead with arms to the sky. all the birds missing. no birdsong here just stillness. like a funeral. two thousand or more a whisper arrives. did you hear it? two thousand. two thousand or more it sounds like glass. our hearts breaking. but we are stronger than that we always rise us mob. two thousand. two thousand or more you can’t break us. we not glass. we are people! two thousand. two thousand or more our Spirit comes together. we make a heart did you see it? in the fragments. it’s there in the glass two thousand. two thousand or more our hearts grow as we mourn for our Land it’s part of us. we love it. poisoned and all
***
Friends in a field, their shadows running long into the untilled ground, and I’m busy trying to catch up, calling for them to hold on a moment, the voice unfamiliar and the words not my own, and when  I wake I realize the last thing I called to them might have been the name of the town we were all looking for, but now it’s a summer morning, the light coming in urgent with day, sheets strewn at the end of the bed, and by the time my mind reaches out for it, that name or word or thought, it’s gone, perhaps lying there up ahead, with them in the town beyond the old shed at the edge of the field, with its collection of discarded tools, hoes and picks and shovels still caked in loam and soil, the old two-furrow plough and an empty feedbag. There’s a persimmon tree, with its thin covering of leaves and its branches weighed by tightly packed, hard orange orbs, dense and  ripening, and a thicket of rosemary sprawling about in the autumn sun, gone wild, looking like it might take over the world with its thick rough tines, the heavy scent that rubs off onto skin and lasts all day even after you wake. But thinking of that town my friends have gone on to, looking out the window at the summer light, the raging open blue of the sky outside, I cross past the old shed to where the harrowed ground forms the first hint of a path between the cherry trees lining the field, to where a pair of jackdaws come in from the north, creamy white throats quiet as the flat slate sky above, flit  between some memory of spring, the one gone or the one up ahead.
***
Athena, coming onto me (verbatim transcription):Every step you take will be the right one. Women encouraged me like that:Avoiding void, no one goes nameless in this world. Power? I was the son of a king:Hacking the armor from the limbs of the dying. In the path of the blade of the plough I met God my foe:Oh blight his voyage with trial and calamity. All he needed was a taste of his own medicine:The water was white with the blades of our oars. Long-limbed Circe, the troubled, could only bring trouble:Sure enough that month became a year. Then Demodocus struck his lyre, and sang for me:In that soft song I led one hundred lives. I was young, singing such distance, when I set out:The meters were my cloak, my map, my axe. Declensions of the beasts defined my travels:I made the lions purr; the lions licked my hands. When gulls cry over rough water, home is close:I remembered Charybdis the Swallower, in her magnificence. Horizon-soaked, I sat and sobbed. Sunset. Shoulders shaking.This was the liver’s dying, the world’s waking.
***
Accommodate the action in your life to wrest the deep perspective of the real from cubic content realms of atmosphere at play beyond the bank and shoal of time. Then resonance begins, and all vibrates. The syntax of position no more sculpts this world of interpenetrative forms than syntaxes of motion render grace. Yet syntax is the caul on all our births; and mothers claw the membrane from our eyes to fret us into life, in losing theirs. From there, each choice engraves a different choice. The decades pass. One needle for one groove. The canticles flare chaos from the spin. The gyre to crackly zero stays the same. (You’ve got to love the Hindus more than most.) We saw grand sweeps of swells from tiny arcs. We sliced the wave face, tumbling into light. My mother hugged me good-bye at seventy-three, knowing, just then, her strength may outlive mine. Accommodate the action in your life, she said, to aeronautical exhausts of every plane and cab I ever caught (my own arcs more elaborate than most). Accommodate the action of your life, she seemed to say: make past and future fuse. I felt her fingers dig into my back: That strength I had is yours. Things die. Not love.
***
Do not a civilization make. Do they? Cozy up to the fleece of a sheep, take the lid off Elizabeth Bishop’s head and get a spoon. Do not eat yet; do not swoon. There will be hours for that. First there is a long war march. Then there are other animals to press into the barn before the lightning storm comes to cook the grass and rinse it and make a mess. But this is all outside and you need never go there. Can you ride a tin? Yes, you can, says the child detective. The poet lies under the sheep, reading of Robert Menzies, his wife Pattie, and their pets. “We had a lovely weekend,” they tell reporters. Just months later their cat’s dead. Robert turns from the golden syrup, while deciding whether to use a knife or a spoon, the television on though it’s only 8 am. Elizabeth was reading her poetry aloud into a woolly microphone. She thought she saw the top of Robert’s head pass by the window.
 


She was thinking of the story “Marmosets” she was translating, by Clarice Lispector. A spirit moved out of the shadows and found an unopened tin in the cupboard and threw it at the window, causing the monkeys on the verandah to flee from the glass. You can hear it on the recording at PennSound. A shearer found glass in a sheep’s fleece months later. “Lucky.” “Why lucky?” “Lucky it didn’t take your thumb off.” That was what Bishop heard about it. She wanted something to give to Clarice. Something in wool or a painting. She saw the earth tipping up, as if she was falling over while looking out the window, and she was traveling to Australia via a flying tin of golden syrup, where there were sheep all ready to cushion her, but it wasn’t necessary for she fell into the arms of the Prime Minister. “Tilted space age pastoral,” she thought, but “marmoset” was what she murmured up at him. He could hear his wife crying that their cat was dead. “It was bloody ASIO!” she bawled. Saying sorry, he dropped the unexpected visitor on the lawn and went to his wife’s aid. He spread one of the scones he’d baked earlier and made a fresh pot. “I don’t want any of that ASIO muck,” Pattie grizzled. Robert turned to Elizabeth to see if she could hear, ready to explain how upset his wife was. Elizabeth had found a curious black spread in the cupboard and was helping herself. “That’s not food,” baa’d the sheep detective. Lightning struck where they’d been sitting just minutes before. “Life is not flat, that’s for sure,” Elizabeth thought to herself, remembering the sheep in the window back home, and starting to write a poem. It would be about flying through the air, and strange food, and the floury arms of a patriarch.
***
A concrete table and chairs set back from the road at the edge of a playing field — vacant, wide with light —  where I step into the background of my imagery, this place in which it is all still to happen, the table set —  plates and side plates, ranked cutlery, napkins in their rings, long-stemmed glasses under a hanging lamp —  the same vine wreathes around its shade as is enchased in the lion-foot salt cellars, turret pepper pots —  Landscape with torsos sunk into mahogany —  pictures by the window, half-drawn blinds, a centerpiece grapes of wire and jade-colored glass, their bloom of dust —  soon I will sit and eat — Now strangers wake in their houses. One by one they have vanished into that blank behind their names, this place in which the room rebuilds itself furnished each time with more of my unreality —  The stone heaps lie around me and nothing is mine —  A concrete table and chairs and gray-green weeds persisting here and out of cracks in bitumen along the fence line where a warehouse backs onto the street, self-seeding at the verge of what the mind makes scenes as if to say what the future will keep of this place will be its innocence, a hunger as undeliberate as rain — 
***
Every sand rushes the beaches are first people’s museum ample by laughter original (overseers) things must change where names are forgiven ports shores bays renamed won’t hurt the truth for children histories futures. The mouth who named mountains for brainwave oversea shook weekage house living, stay by a dead cold rotten lie. Whitefellas must derigetter their conzinerices atturies. Beach have turn not by your Scotland bream them down under sir Scot cos you’ve stole Blackfellas alots. Homestead will fall again for huppy Yumbas, gaining restored trust to not live in past. Telegraphic Aborigines were always in first port worlds. Aquarium birds mammals sing now, tell us substantial ramps up on the banks that flanked the dreamers times occupants. Nature rates over new buildings. New names for the city towns not virgin bush inkeep as the real keeper are watching every development. Renames IDs of all needs domain pleasant rebirth to grow majority. First houses were here by natives nice and right to season changing by dreaming winds rain hot people’s names ...     Dromana man reclaim names first foremost.
***
An hourglass constricted, the whore inside of me who is watching the clock, monitoring the time, this wasted time to get off, get going, lunar cycle gauge of tide and meridian. How I can hear the sand slip downward in my body clock? I need to be here, could be there, and not long ago the only place you wanted me to be was by your side ... maybe?

I am a pencil that cannot sharpen,
                            ink that slides off paper,


                                                      outside of our time, I am lost,
 
                                                                                 a one ended boomerang.

 
                ***
The last snow is baited. Where the future shatters it unbends. The dry bed of entirety, where the sun bends, shatters. I was not afraid to tell you: unobscene at the first and then the third horizon, a copse-mountain opened so near to me I weighed nothing, and you laid the flower in my mouth. These are not animals. These are the partial genocides deeply uncompensated. Under the grass there is nothing but water and two wings.
***
What say the Bells of San Blas To the ships that southward pass        From the harbor of Mazatlan? To them it is nothing more Than the sound of surf on the shore,—        Nothing more to master or man. But to me, a dreamer of dreams, To whom what is and what seems        Are often one and the same,— The Bells of San Blas to me Have a strange, wild melody,        And are something more than a name. For bells are the voice of the church; They have tones that touch and search        The hearts of young and old; One sound to all, yet each Lends a meaning to their speech,        And the meaning is manifold. They are a voice of the Past, Of an age that is fading fast,        Of a power austere and grand; When the flag of Spain unfurled Its folds o'er this western world,        And the Priest was lord of the land. The chapel that once looked down On the little seaport town        Has crumbled into the dust; And on oaken beams below The bells swing to and fro,        And are green with mould and rust. "Is, then, the old faith dead," They say, "and in its stead        Is some new faith proclaimed, That we are forced to remain Naked to sun and rain,        Unsheltered and ashamed? "Once in our tower aloof We rang over wall and roof        Our warnings and our complaints; And round about us there The white doves filled the air,        Like the white souls of the saints. "The saints! Ah, have they grown Forgetful of their own?        Are they asleep, or dead, That open to the sky Their ruined Missions lie,        No longer tenanted? "Oh, bring us back once more The vanished days of yore,        When the world with faith was filled; Bring back the fervid zeal, The hearts of fire and steel,        The hands that believe and build. "Then from our tower again We will send over land and main        Our voices of command, Like exiled kings who return To their thrones, and the people learn        That the Priest is lord of the land!" O Bells of San Blas, in vain Ye call back the Past again!        The Past is deaf to your prayer; Out of the shadows of night The world rolls into light;        It is daybreak everywhere.
***
Half of my life is gone, and I have let    The years slip from me and have not fulfilled    The aspiration of my youth, to build    Some tower of song with lofty parapet. Not indolence, nor pleasure, nor the fret    Of restless passions that would not be stilled,    But sorrow, and a care that almost killed,    Kept me from what I may accomplish yet; Though, half-way up the hill, I see the Past    Lying beneath me with its sounds and sights,—    A city in the twilight dim and vast, With smoking roofs, soft bells, and gleaming lights,—    And hear above me on the autumnal blast    The cataract of Death far thundering from the heights.
***
Come to your heaven, you heavenly choirs, Earth hath the heaven of your desires. Remove your dwelling to your God; A stall is now his best abode. Sith men their homage do deny, Come, angels, all their fault supply. His chilling cold doth heat require; Come, seraphins, in lieu of fire. This little ark no cover hath; Let cherubs’ wings his body swathe. Come, Raphael, this babe must eat; Provide our little Toby meat. Let Gabriel be now his groom, That first took up his earthly room. Let Michael stand in his defense, Whom love hath linked to feeble sense. Let graces rock when he doth cry, And angels sing his lullaby. The same you saw in heavenly seat Is he that now sucks Mary’s teat; Agnize your king a mortal wight, His borrowed weed lets not your sight. Come, kiss the manger where he lies, That is your bliss above the skies. This little babe, so few days old, Is come to rifle Satan’s fold; All hell doth at his presence quake. Though he himself for cold do shake, For in this weak unarmèd wise The gates of hell he will surprise. With tears he fights and wins the field; His naked breast stands for a shield; His battering shot are babish cries, His arrows looks of weeping eyes, His martial ensigns cold and need, And feeble flesh his warrior’s steed. His camp is pitchèd in a stall, His bulwark but a broken wall, The crib his trench, hay stalks his stakes, Of shepherds he his muster makes; And thus, as sure his foe to wound, The angels’ trumps alarum sound. My soul, with Christ join thou in fight; Stick to the tents that he hath pight; Within his crib is surest ward, This little babe will be thy guard. If thou wilt foil thy foes with joy, Then flit not from this heavenly boy.
***
Go wailing verse, the infants of my love, Minerva-like, brought forth without a Mother: Present the image of the cares I prove, Witness your Father’s grief exceeds all other. Sigh out a story of her cruel deeds, With interrupted accents of despair: A monument that whosoever reads, May justly praise, and blame my loveless Fair. Say her disdain hath dried up my blood, And starved you, in succours still denying: Press to her eyes, importune me some good; Waken her sleeping pity with your crying. Knock at that hard heart, beg till you have moved her; And tell th’unkind, how dearly I have loved her.
***
But love whilst that thou mayst be loved again, Now whilst thy May hath filed thy lap with flowers, Now whilst thy beauty bears without a stain, Now use the summer smiles, ere winter lowers. And whilst thou spread’st unto the rising sun The fairest flower that ever saw the light, Now joy thy time before thy sweet be done, And, Delia, think thy morning must have night, And that thy brightness sets at length to west, When thou wilt close up that which now thou shew’st; And think the same becomes they fading best Which then shall most inveil and shadow most. Men do not weigh the stalk for what it was, When once they find her flower, her glory, pass.
***
When men shall find thy flower, thy glory pass, And thou, with careful brow sitting alone, Receivèd hast this message from thy glass, That tells thee truth, and says that all is gone, Fresh shalt thou see in me the wounds thou madest, Though spent thy flame, in me the heat remaining, I that have loved thee thus before thou fadest, My faith shall wax, when thou art in thy waning. The world shall find this miracle in me, That fire can burn when all the matter’s spent; Then what my faith hath been thyself shall see, And that thou wast unkind thou mayst repent. Thou mayst repent that thou hast scorned my tears, When Winter snows upon thy golden hairs.
***
Unhappy pen and ill accepted papers, That intimate in vain my chaste desires, My chaste desires, the ever burning tapers, Enkindled by her eyes’ celestial fires. Celestial fires and unrespecting powers, That deign not view the glory of your might, In humble lines the work of careful hours, The sacrifice I offer to her sight. But since she scorns her own, this rests for me, I’ll moan my self, and hide the wrong I have: And so content me that her frowns should be To my infant style the cradle, and the grave. What though my self no honor get thereby, Each bird sings t’herself, and so will I.
***
Are they shadows that we see?And can shadows pleasure give?Pleasures only shadows be Cast by bodies we conceive And are made the things we deemIn those figures which they seem.But these pleasures vanish fastWhich by shadows are expressed;Pleasures are not, if they last;In their passing is their best.Glory is most bright and gayIn a flash, and so away.Feed apace then, greedy eyes,On the wonder you behold;Take it sudden as it flies,Though you take it not to hold.When your eyes have done their part,Thought must length it in the heart.
***
1 Shep.      Tell me, thou gentle shepherd swain,              Who’s yonder in the vale is set?2 Shep.      Oh, it is she, whose sweets do stain              The lily, rose, the violet!1 Shep.      Why doth the sun against his kind,              Fix his bright chariot in the skies?2 Shep.      Because the sun is stricken blind              With looking on her heavenly eyes.1 Shep.      Why do thy flocks forbear their food,              Which sometime were thy chief delight?2 Shep.      Because they need no other good              That live in presence of her sight.1 Shep.      Why look these flowers so pale and ill,              That once attired this goodly heath?2 Shep.      She hath robb’d Nature of her skill,              And sweetens all things with her breath.1 Shep.      Why slide these brooks so slow away,              Whose bubbling murmur pleased thine ear?2 Shep.      Oh, marvel not although they stay,              When they her heavenly voice do hear!1 Shep.      From whence come all these shepherd swains,              And lovely nymphs attired in green?2 Shep.      From gathering garlands on the plains,              To crown our fair the shepherds’ queen.Both.        The sun that lights this world below,              Flocks, flowers, and brooks will witness bear:              These nymphs and shepherds all do know,              That it is she is only fair.
***
If he from heaven that filched that living fire Condemned by Jove to endless torment be, I greatly marvel how you still go free, That far beyond Prometheus did aspire. The fire he stole, although of heavenly kind, Which from above he craftily did take, Of liveless clods, us living men to make, He did bestow in temper of the mind. But you broke into heaven’s immortal store, Where virtue, honor, wit, and beauty lay; Which taking thence you have escaped away, Yet stand as free as ere you did before;    Yet old Prometheus punished for his rape.    Thus poor thieves suffer when the greater ‘scape.
***
From fairest creatures we desire increase, That thereby beauty’s rose might never die, But as the riper should by time decease, His tender heir might bear his memory; But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes, Feed’st thy light’s flame with self-substantial fuel, Making a famine where abundance lies, Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel. Though that art now the world’s fresh ornament And only herald to the gaudy spring, Within thine own bud buriest thy content, And, tender churl, mak’st waste in niggarding.    Pity the world, or else this glutton be,    To eat the world’s due, by the grave and thee.
***
Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest, Now is the time that face should form another, Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest, Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother. For where is she so fair whose uneared womb Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry? Or who is he so fond will be the tomb Of his self-love, to stop posterity? Thou art thy mother’s glass, and she in thee Calls back the lovely April of her prime; So thou through windows of thine age shalt see, Despite of wrinkles, this thy golden time.     But if thou live rememb’red not to be,     Die single, and thine image dies with thee.
***
Black maid, complain not that I fly, When Fate commands antipathy: Prodigious might that union prove, Where Night and Day together move, And the conjunction of our lips Not kisses make, but an eclipse, In which the mixed black and white Portends more terror than delight. Yet if my shadow thou wilt be, Enjoy thy dearest wish. But see Thou take my shadow’s property, That hastes away when I come nigh.     Else stay till death hath blinded me, And then I will bequeath myself to thee.
***
No more be grieved at that which thou hast done: Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud, Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud. All men make faults, and even I in this, Authórizing thy trespass with compare, Myself corrupting salving thy amiss, Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are: For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense— Thy adverse party is thy advocate— And ‘gainst myself a lawful plea commence. Such civil war is in my love and hate,    That I an áccessory needs must be    To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
***
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea But sad mortality o’er-sways their power, How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, Whose action is no stronger than a flower? O, how shall summer’s honey breath hold out Against the wrackful siege of batt’ring days, When rocks impregnable are not so stout, Nor gates of steel so strong, but time decays? O fearful meditation! where, alack, Shall time’s best jewel from time’s chest lie hid? Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?    O, none, unless this miracle have might,    That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
***
Why is my verse so barren of new pride, So far from variation or quick change? Why with the time do I not glance aside To new-found methods, and to compounds strange? Why write I still all one, ever the same, And keep invention in a noted weed, That every word doth almost tell my name, Showing their birth, and where they did proceed? O know, sweet love, I always write of you, And you and love are still my argument, So all my best is dressing old words new, Spending again what is already spent:    For as the sun is daily new and old,    So is my love still telling what is told.
***
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing, And like enough thou knowst thy estimate. The Charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; My bonds in thee are all determinate. For how do I hold thee but by thy granting, And for that riches where is my deserving? The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, And so my patent back again is swerving. Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing, Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking, So thy great gift, upon misprision growing, Comes home again, on better judgement making.    Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter:    In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
***
O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy pow’r Dost hold time’s fickle glass his sickle hour, Who hast by waning grown, and therein show’st Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow’st— In nature, sovereign mistress over wrack, As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back, She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill May time disgrace, and wretched minute kill. Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure; She may detain but not still keep her treasure.    Her audit, though delayed, answered must be,    And her quietus is to render thee.
***
Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy Will, And Will to boot, and Will in overplus; More than enough am I that vex thee still, To thy sweet will making addition thus. Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? Shall will in others seem right gracious, And in my will no fair acceptance shine? The sea, all water, yet receives rain still, And in abundance addeth to his store; So thou being rich in Will add to thy Will One will of mine, to make thy large Will more.    Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill;    Think all but one, and me in that one Will.
***
Two loves I have of comfort and despair, Which like two spirits do suggest me still The better angel is a man right fair, The worser spirit a woman coloured ill. To win me soon to hell, my female evil Tempteth my better angel from my side, And would corrupt my saint to be a devil, Wooing his purity with her foul pride. And, whether that my angel be turn’d fiend, Suspect I may, yet not directly tell, But being both from me both to each friend, I guess one angel in another’s hell.    Yet this shall I ne’er know, but live in doubt,    Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
***
Blow, blow, thou winter wind,    Thou art not so unkind       As man’s ingratitude;    Thy tooth is not so keen, Because thou art not seen,       Although thy breath be rude. Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly: Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:    Then, heigh-ho, the holly!       This life is most jolly.***
Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more.     Men were deceivers ever, One foot in sea, and one on shore,     To one thing constant never. Then sigh not so, but let them go,     And be you blithe and bonny, Converting all your sounds of woe     Into hey nonny, nonny. Sing no more ditties, sing no more     Of dumps so dull and heavy. The fraud of men was ever so     Since summer first was leafy. Then sigh not so, but let them go,     And be you blithe and bonny, Converting all your sounds of woe     Into hey, nonny, nonny.
***
Come away, come away, death,     And in sad cypress let me be laid. Fly away, fly away, breath;     I am slain by a fair cruel maid. My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,              O, prepare it! My part of death, no one so true          Did share it. Not a flower, not a flower sweet,     On my black coffin let there be strown. Not a friend, not a friend greet     My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown. A thousand thousand sighs to save,              Lay me, O, where Sad true lover never find my grave,              To weep there!
***
Where the bee sucks, there suck I: In a cowslip’s bell I lie; There I couch when owls do cry. On the bat’s back I do fly After summer merrily.   Merrily, merrily shall I live now Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
***
As I one evening sat before my cell, Methought a star did shoot into my lap. I rose and shook my clothes, as knowing well That from small fires comes oft no small mishap;        When suddenly I heard one say,        “Do as thou usest, disobey,        Expel good motions from thy breast, Which have the face of fire, but end in rest.” I, who had heard of music in the spheres, But not of speech in stars, began to muse; But turning to my God, whose ministers The stars and all things are: “If I refuse,        Dread Lord,” said I, “so oft my good,        Then I refuse not ev’n with blood        To wash away my stubborn thought; For I will do or suffer what I ought. “But I have also stars and shooters too, Born where thy servants both artilleries use. My tears and prayers night and day do woo And work up to thee; yet thou dost refuse.        Not but I am (I must say still)        Much more obliged to do thy will        Than thou to grant mine; but because Thy promise now hath ev’n set thee thy laws. “Then we are shooters both, and thou dost deign To enter combat with us, and contest With thine own clay. But I would parley fain: Shun not my arrows, and behold my breast.        Yet if thou shunnest, I am thine:        I must be so, if I am mine.        There is no articling with thee: I am but finite, yet thine infinitely.”
***
My sweetest Lesbia, let us live and love,And though the sager sort our deeds reprove,Let us not weigh them. Heaven’s great lamps do diveInto their west, and straight again revive,But soon as once set is our little light,Then must we sleep one ever-during night.If all would lead their lives in love like me,Then bloody swords and armor should not be;No drum nor trumpet peaceful sleeps should move,Unless alarm came from the camp of love.But fools do live, and waste their little light,And seek with pain their ever-during night.When timely death my life and fortune ends,Let not my hearse be vexed with mourning friends,But let all lovers, rich in triumph, comeAnd with sweet pastimes grace my happy tomb;And Lesbia, close up thou my little light,And crown with love my ever-during night.
***
I care not for these ladies,That must be wooed and prayed:Give me kind Amaryllis,The wanton country maid.Nature art disdaineth,Her beauty is her own.   Her when we court and kiss,       She cries, “Forsooth, let go!”   But when we come where comfort is,   She never will say no.If I love Amaryllis,She gives me fruit and flowers:But if we love these ladies,We must give golden showers.Give them gold, that sell love,Give me the nut-brown lass,   Who, when we court and kiss,   She cries, “Forsooth, let go!”   But when we come where comfort is,   She never will say no.These ladies must have pillows,And beds by strangers wrought;Give me a bower of willows,Of moss and leaves unbought,And fresh Amaryllis,With milk and honey fed;   Who, when we court and kiss,   She cries, “Forsooth, let go!”   But when we come where comfort is,   She never will say no.
***
When to her lute Corinna sings,Her voice revives the leaden strings,And doth in highest notes appearAs any challenged echo clear;But when she doth of mourning speak,Ev’n with her sighs the strings do break.And as her lute doth live or die,Let by her passion, so must I:For when of pleasure she doth sing,My thoughts enjoy a sudden spring,But if she doth of sorrow speak, Ev’n from my heart the strings do break.
***
Now winter nights enlarge   The number of their hours;And clouds their storms discharge   Upon the airy towers.Let now the chimneys blaze   And cups o’erflow with wine,Let well-turned words amaze   With harmony divine.Now yellow waxen lights    Shall wait on honey loveWhile youthful revels, masques, and courtly sights   Sleep’s leaden spells remove.This time doth well dispense   With lovers’ long discourse;Much speech hath some defense,   Though beauty no remorse.All do not all things well;   Some measures comely tread,Some knotted riddles tell,   Some poems smoothly read.The summer hath his joys,   And winter his delights;Though love and all his pleasures are but toys,   They shorten tedious nights.
***
Adieu, farewell, earth’s bliss; This world uncertain is; Fond are life’s lustful joys; Death proves them all but toys; None from his darts can fly; I am sick, I must die.    Lord, have mercy on us! Rich men, trust not in wealth, Gold cannot buy you health; Physic himself must fade. All things to end are made, The plague full swift goes by; I am sick, I must die.    Lord, have mercy on us! Beauty is but a flower Which wrinkles will devour; Brightness falls from the air; Queens have died young and fair; Dust hath closed Helen’s eye. I am sick, I must die.    Lord, have mercy on us! Strength stoops unto the grave, Worms feed on Hector’s brave; Swords may not fight with fate, Earth still holds ope her gate. “Come, come!” the bells do cry. I am sick, I must die.    Lord, have mercy on us. Wit with his wantonness Tasteth death’s bitterness; Hell’s executioner Hath no ears for to hear What vain art can reply. I am sick, I must die.    Lord, have mercy on us. Haste, therefore, each degree, To welcome destiny; Heaven is our heritage, Earth but a player’s stage; Mount we unto the sky. I am sick, I must die.    Lord, have mercy on us.
***
Farewell (sweet Cooke-ham) where I first obtained Grace from that grace where perfect grace remained; And where the muses gave their full consent, I should have power the virtuous to content; Where princely palace willed me to indite, The sacred story of the soul’s delight. Farewell (sweet place) where virtue then did rest, And all delights did harbor in her breast; Never shall my sad eyes again behold Those pleasures which my thoughts did then unfold. Yet you (great Lady) Mistress of that place, From whose desires did spring this work of grace; Vouchsafe to think upon those pleasures past, As fleeting worldly joys that could not last, Or, as dim shadows of celestial pleasures, Which are desired above all earthly treasures. Oh how (methought) against you thither came, Each part did seem some new delight to frame! The house received all ornaments to grace it, And would endure no foulness to deface it. And walks put on their summer liveries, And all things else did hold like similes. The trees with leaves, with fruits, with flowers clad, Embraced each other, seeming to be glad, Turning themselves to beauteous Canopies, To shade the bright sun from your brighter eyes; The crystal streams with silver spangles graced, While by the glorious sun they were embraced; The little birds in chirping notes did sing, To entertain both you and that sweet spring. And Philomela with her sundry lays, Both you and that delightful place did praise. Oh how me thought each plant, each flower, each tree Set forth their beauties then to welcome thee! The very hills right humbly did descend, When you to tread on them did intend. And as you set your feet, they still did rise, Glad that they could receive so rich a prize. The gentle winds did take delight to be Among those woods that were so graced by thee, And in sad murmur uttered pleasing sound, That pleasure in that place might more abound. The swelling banks delivered all their pride When such a Phoenix once they had espied. Each arbor, bank, each seat, each stately tree, Thought themselves honored in supporting thee; The pretty birds would oft come to attend thee, Yet fly away for fear they should offend thee; The little creatures in the burrough by Would come abroad to sport them in your eye, Yet fearful of the bow in your fair hand. Would run away when you did make a stand. Now let me come unto that stately tree, Wherein such goodly prospects you did see; That oak that did in height his fellows pass, As much as lofty trees, low growing grass, Much like a comely cedar straight and tall, Whose beauteous stature far exceeded all. How often did you visit this fair tree, Which seeming joyful in receiving thee, Would like a palm tree spread his arms abroad, Desirous that you there should make abode; Whose fair green leaves much like a comely veil, Defended Phoebus when he would assail; Whose pleasing boughs did yield a cool fresh air, Joying his happiness when you were there. Where being seated, you might plainly see Hills, vales, and woods, as if on bended knee They had appeared, your honor to salute, Or to prefer some strange unlooked-for suit; All interlaced with brooks and crystal springs, A prospect fit to please the eyes of kings. And thirteen shires appeared all in your sight, Europe could not afford much more delight. What was there then but gave you all content, While you the time in meditation spent Of their Creator’s power, which there you saw, In all his creatures held a perfect law; And in their beauties did you plain descry His beauty, wisdom, grace, love, majesty. In these sweet woods how often did you walk, With Christ and his Apostles there to talk; Placing his holy Writ in some fair tree To meditate what you therein did see. With Moses you did mount his holy hill To know his pleasure, and perform his will. With lowly David you did often sing His holy hymns to Heaven’s eternal King. And in sweet music did your soul delight To sound his praises, morning, noon, and night. With blessed Joseph you did often feed Your pined brethren, when they stood in need. And that sweet Lady sprung from Clifford’s race, Of noble Bedford’s blood, fair stem of grace, To honorable Dorset now espoused, In whose fair breast true virtue then was housed, Oh what delight did my weak spirits find In those pure parts of her well framèd mind. And yet it grieves me that I cannot be Near unto her, whose virtues did agree With those fair ornaments of outward beauty, Which did enforce from all both love and duty. Unconstant Fortune, thou art most to blame, Who casts us down into so low a frame Where our great friends we cannot daily see, So great a difference is there in degree. Many are placed in those orbs of state, Partners in honor, so ordained by Fate, Nearer in show, yet farther off in love, In which, the lowest always are above. But whither am I carried in conceit, My wit too weak to conster of the great. Why not? although we are but born of earth, We may behold the heavens, despising death; And loving heaven that is so far above, May in the end vouchsafe us entire love. Therefore sweet memory do thou retain Those pleasures past, which will not turn again: Remember beauteous Dorset’s former sports, So far from being touched by ill reports, Wherein myself did always bear a part, While reverend love presented my true heart. Those recreations let me bear in mind, Which her sweet youth and noble thoughts did find, Whereof deprived, I evermore must grieve, Hating blind Fortune, careless to relieve, And you sweet Cooke-ham, whom these ladies leave, I now must tell the grief you did conceive At their departure, when they went away, How everything retained a sad dismay. Nay long before, when once an inkling came, Methought each thing did unto sorrow frame: The trees that were so glorious in our view, Forsook both flowers and fruit, when once they knew Of your depart, their very leaves did wither, Changing their colors as they grew together. But when they saw this had no power to stay you, They often wept, though, speechless, could not pray you, Letting their tears in your fair bosoms fall, As if they said, Why will ye leave us all? This being vain, they cast their leaves away Hoping that pity would have made you stay: Their frozen tops, like age’s hoary hairs, Shows their disasters, languishing in fears. A swarthy riveled rind all over spread, Their dying bodies half alive, half dead. But your occasions called you so away That nothing there had power to make you stay. Yet did I see a noble grateful mind Requiting each according to their kind, Forgetting not to turn and take your leave Of these sad creatures, powerless to receive Your favor, when with grief you did depart, Placing their former pleasures in your heart, Giving great charge to noble memory There to preserve their love continually. But specially the love of that fair tree, That first and last you did vouchsafe to see, In which it pleased you oft to take the air With noble Dorset, then a virgin fair, Where many a learned book was read and scanned, To this fair tree, taking me by the hand, You did repeat the pleasures which had passed, Seeming to grieve they could no longer last. And with a chaste, yet loving kiss took leave, Of which sweet kiss I did it soon bereave, Scorning a senseless creature should possess So rare a favor, so great happiness. No other kiss it could receive from me, For fear to give back what it took of thee, So I ungrateful creature did deceive it Of that which you in love vouchsafed to leave it. And though it oft had given me much content, Yet this great wrong I never could repent; But of the happiest made it most forlorn, To show that nothing’s free from Fortune’s scorne, While all the rest with this most beauteous tree Made their sad consort sorrow’s harmony. The flowers that on the banks and walks did grow, Crept in the ground, the grass did weep for woe. The winds and waters seemed to chide together Because you went away they knew not whither; And those sweet brooks that ran so fair and clear, With grief and trouble wrinkled did appear. Those pretty birds that wonted were to sing, Now neither sing, nor chirp, nor use their wing, But with their tender feet on some bare spray, Warble forth sorrow, and their own dismay. Fair Philomela leaves her mournful ditty, Drowned in deep sleep, yet can procure no pity. Each arbor, bank, each seat, each stately tree Looks bare and desolate now for want of thee, Turning green tresses into frosty gray, While in cold grief they wither all away. The sun grew weak, his beams no comfort gave, While all green things did make the earth their grave. Each brier, each bramble, when you went away Caught fast your clothes, thinking to make you stay; Delightful Echo wonted to reply To our last words, did now for sorrow die; The house cast off each garment that might grace it, Putting on dust and cobwebs to deface it. All desolation then there did appear, When you were going whom they held so dear. This last farewell to Cooke-ham here I give, When I am dead thy name in this may live, Wherein I have performed her noble hest  Whose virtues lodge in my unworthy breast, And ever shall, so long as life remains, Tying my life to her by those rich chains.
***
I’ll tell thee now (dear Love) what thou shalt do     To anger destiny, as she doth us,     How I shall stay, though she esloygne me thus And how posterity shall know it too;          How thine may out-endure          Sybil’s glory, and obscure          Her who from Pindar could allure,     And her, through whose help Lucan is not lame, And her, whose book (they say) Homer did find, and name. Study our manuscripts, those myriads     Of letters, which have past twixt thee and me,     Thence write our annals, and in them will be   To all whom love’s subliming fire invades,          Rule and example found;          There, the faith of any ground          No schismatic will dare to wound,     That sees, how Love this grace to us affords, To make, to keep, to use, to be these his records. This book, as long-lived as the elements,     Or as the world’s form, this all-graved tome     In cipher writ, or new made idiom; We for love’s clergy only’are instruments,          When this book is made thus,          Should again the ravenous          Vandals and the Goths invade us,     Learning were safe; in this our universe Schools might learn sciences, spheres music, angels verse. Here Love’s divines (since all divinity     Is love or wonder) may find all they seek,     Whether abstract spiritual love they like, Their souls exhaled with what they do not see,          Or loth so to amuse          Faith’s infirmity, they choose          Something which they may see and use;     For, though mind be the heaven, where love doth sit, Beauty’a convenient type may be to figure it. Here more than in their books may lawyers find,     Both by what titles mistresses are ours,     And how prerogative these states devours, Transferred from Love himself, to womankind,          Who though from heart, and eyes,          They exact great subsidies,          Forsake him who on them relies     And for the cause, honor, or conscience give, Chimeras, vain as they, or their prerogative. Here statesmen (or of them, they which can read)     May of their occupation find the grounds,     Love and their art alike it deadly wounds, If to consider what’tis, one proceed,          In both they do excel          Who the present govern well,          Whose weakness none doth, or dares tell;     In this thy book, such will there nothing see, As in the Bible some can find out alchemy. Thus vent thy thoughts; abroad I’ll study thee,     As he removes far off, that great heights takes;     How great love is, presence best trial makes, But absence tries how long this love will be;          To take a latitude          Sun, or stars, are fitliest viewed          At their brightest, but to conclude,     Of longitudes, what other way have we, But to mark when, and where the dark eclipses be?
***
Nature’s lay idiot, I taught thee to love, And in that sophistry, oh, thou dost prove Too subtle: Fool, thou didst not understand The mystic language of the eye nor hand: Nor couldst thou judge the difference of the air Of sighs, and say, this lies, this sounds despair: Nor by the’eye’s water call a malady Desperately hot, or changing feverously. I had not taught thee then, the alphabet Of flowers, how they devicefully being set And bound up, might with speechless secrecy Deliver errands mutely, and mutually. Remember since all thy words used to be To every suitor, “I, ’if my friends agree”; Since, household charms, thy husband’s name to teach, Were all the love-tricks, that thy wit could reach; And since, an hour’s discourse could scarce have made One answer in thee, and that ill arrayed  In broken proverbs, and torn sentences. Thou art not by so many duties his, That from the’world’s common having severed thee, Inlaid thee, neither to be seen, nor see, As mine: who have with amorous delicacies Refined thee’into a blissful paradise. Thy graces and good words my creatures be; I planted knowledge and life’s tree in thee, Which oh, shall strangers taste? Must I alas  Frame and enamel plate, and drink in glass? Chafe wax for others’ seals? break a colt’s force And leave him then, being made a ready horse?
***
Pray thee, take care, that tak’st my book in hand, To read it well: that is, to understand. 
***
Here lies, to each her parents’ ruth, Mary, the daughter of their youth; Yet all heaven’s gifts being heaven’s due, It makes the father less to rue. At six months’ end she parted hence With safety of her innocence; Whose soul heaven’s queen, whose name she bears, In comfort of her mother’s tears, Hath placed amongst her virgin-train: Where, while that severed doth remain, This grave partakes the fleshly birth; Which cover lightly, gentle earth!
***
Spies, you are lights in state, but of base stuff, Who, when you’ve burnt yourselves down to the snuff, Stink and are thrown away. End fair enough.
***
Thy praise or dispraise is to me alike:One doth not stroke me, nor the other strike.
***
That neither fame nor love might wanting be To greatness, Cary, I sing that and thee; Whose house, if it no other honor had, In only thee might be both great and glad; Who, to upbraid the sloth of this our time, Durst valor make almost, but not, a crime; Which deed I know not, whether were more high, Or thou more happy, it to justify Against thy fortune: when no foe, that day, Could conquer thee but chance, who did betray. Love thy great loss, which a renown hath won, To live when Broick not stands, nor Ruhr doth run. Love honors, which of best example be When they cost dearest and are done most free; Though every fortitude deserves applause, It may be much or little in the cause. He’s valiant’st that dares fight, and not for pay; That virtuous is, when the reward’s away.
***
Playwright, convict of public wrongs to men, Takes private beatings and begins again. Two kinds of valor he doth show at once: Active in ’s brain, and passive in his bones. 
***
That poets are far rarer births than kings Your noblest father proved; like whom before, Or then, or since, about our Muses’ springs, Came not that soul exhausted so their store. Hence was it that the destinies decreed (Save that most masculine issue of his brain) No male unto him; who could so exceed Nature, they thought, in all that he would fain. At which she, happily displeased, made you, On whom, if he were living now to look, He should those rare and absolute numbers view, As he would burn or better far his book. 
***
Would you believe, when you this monsieur see, That his whole body should speak French, not he? That so much scarf of France, and hat, and feather, And shoe, and tie, and garter should come hether, And land on one whose face durst never be Toward the sea farther than Half-Way Tree? That he, untraveled, should be French so much As Frenchmen in his company should seem Dutch? Or had his father, when he did him get, The French disease, with which he labors yet? Or hung some monsieur’s picture on the wall, By which his dam conceived him, clothes and all? Or is it some French statue? No: ’T doth move, And stoop, and cringe. O then, it needs must prove The new French tailor’s motion, monthly made, Daily to turn in Paul’s, and help the trade.
***
Tonight, grave sir, both my poor house, and I Do equally desire your company; Not that we think us worthy such a guest, But that your worth will dignify our feast With those that come, whose grace may make that seem Something, which else could hope for no esteem. It is the fair acceptance, sir, creates The entertainment perfect, not the cates. Yet shall you have, to rectify your palate, An olive, capers, or some better salad Ushering the mutton; with a short-legged hen, If we can get her, full of eggs, and then Lemons, and wine for sauce; to these a cony Is not to be despaired of, for our money; And, though fowl now be scarce, yet there are clerks, The sky not falling, think we may have larks. I’ll tell you of more, and lie, so you will come: Of partridge, pheasant, woodcock, of which some May yet be there, and godwit, if we can; Knat, rail, and ruff too. Howsoe’er, my man Shall read a piece of Virgil, Tacitus, Livy, or of some better book to us, Of which we’ll speak our minds, amidst our meat; And I’ll profess no verses to repeat. To this, if ought appear which I not know of, That will the pastry, not my paper, show of.Digestive cheese and fruit there sure will be; But that which most doth take my Muse and me, Is a pure cup of rich Canary wine, Which is the Mermaid’s now, but shall be mine; Of which had Horace, or Anacreon tasted, Their lives, as so their lines, till now had lasted. Tobacco, nectar, or the Thespian spring, Are all but Luther's beer to this I sing. Of this we will sup free, but moderately, And we will have no Pooley, or Parrot by, Nor shall our cups make any guilty men; But, at our parting we will be as when We innocently met. No simple word That shall be uttered at our mirthful board, Shall make us sad next morning or affright The liberty that we’ll enjoy tonight.
***
Gut eats all day and lechers all the night; So all his meat he tasteth over twice; And, striving so to double his delight, He makes himself a thoroughfare of vice. Thus in his belly can he change a sin: Lust it comes out, that gluttony went in.
***
Thou art not, Penshurst, built to envious show,Of touch or marble; nor canst boast a rowOf polished pillars, or a roof of gold;Thou hast no lantern, whereof tales are told,Or stair, or courts; but stand’st an ancient pile,And, these grudged at, art reverenced the while.Thou joy’st in better marks, of soil, of air,Of wood, of water; therein thou art fair.Thou hast thy walks for health, as well as sport;Thy mount, to which the dryads do resort,Where Pan and Bacchus their high feasts have made,Beneath the broad beech and the chestnut shade;That taller tree, which of a nut was setAt his great birth where all the Muses met.There in the writhèd bark are cut the namesOf many a sylvan, taken with his flames;And thence the ruddy satyrs oft provokeThe lighter fauns to reach thy Lady’s Oak.Thy copse too, named of Gamage, thou hast there,That never fails to serve thee seasoned deerWhen thou wouldst feast or exercise thy friends.The lower land, that to the river bends,Thy sheep, thy bullocks, kine, and calves do feed;The middle grounds thy mares and horses breed.Each bank doth yield thee conies; and the tops,Fertile of wood, Ashore and Sidney’s copse,To crown thy open table, doth provideThe purpled pheasant with the speckled side;The painted partridge lies in every field,And for thy mess is willing to be killed.And if the high-swollen Medway fail thy dish,Thou hast thy ponds, that pay thee tribute fish,Fat aged carps that run into thy net,And pikes, now weary their own kind to eat,As loath the second draught or cast to stay,Officiously at first themselves betray;Bright eels that emulate them, and leap on landBefore the fisher, or into his hand.Then hath thy orchard fruit, thy garden flowers,Fresh as the air, and new as are the hours.The early cherry, with the later plum,Fig, grape, and quince, each in his time doth come;The blushing apricot and woolly peach Hang on thy walls, that every child may reach.And though thy walls be of the country stone,They’re reared with no man’s ruin, no man’s groan;There’s none that dwell about them wish them down;But all come in, the farmer and the clown,And no one empty-handed, to saluteThy lord and lady, though they have no suit.Some bring a capon, some a rural cake,Some nuts, some apples; some that think they makeThe better cheeses bring them, or else sendBy their ripe daughters, whom they would commendThis way to husbands, and whose baskets bearAn emblem of themselves in plum or pear.But what can this (more than express their love)Add to thy free provisions, far aboveThe need of such? whose liberal board doth flowWith all that hospitality doth know;Where comes no guest but is allowed to eat,Without his fear, and of thy lord’s own meat;Where the same beer and bread, and selfsame wine,This is his lordship’s shall be also mine,And I not fain to sit (as some this dayAt great men’s tables), and yet dine away.Here no man tells my cups; nor, standing by,A waiter doth my gluttony envy,But gives me what I call, and lets me eat;He knows below he shall find plenty of meat.The tables hoard not up for the next day;Nor, when I take my lodging, need I prayFor fire, or lights, or livery; all is there,As if thou then wert mine, or I reigned here:There’s nothing I can wish, for which I stay.That found King James when, hunting late this wayWith his brave son, the prince, they saw thy firesShine bright on every hearth, as the desiresOf thy Penates had been set on flameTo entertain them; or the country cameWith all their zeal to warm their welcome here.What (great I will not say, but) sudden cheerDidst thou then make ’em! and what praise was heaped On thy good lady then, who therein reapedThe just reward of her high housewifery;To have her linen, plate, and all things nigh,When she was far; and not a room but dressedAs if it had expected such a guest!These, Penshurst, are thy praise, and yet not all.Thy lady’s noble, fruitful, chaste withal.His children thy great lord may call his own,A fortune in this age but rarely known.They are, and have been, taught religion; thenceTheir gentler spirits have sucked innocence.Each morn and even they are taught to pray,With the whole household, and may, every day,Read in their virtuous parents’ noble partsThe mysteries of manners, arms, and arts.Now, Penshurst, they that will proportion theeWith other edifices, when they seeThose proud, ambitious heaps, and nothing else,May say their lords have built, but thy lord dwells.
***
Come, my Celia, let us prove, While we can, the sports of love; Time will not be ours forever; He at length our good will sever. Spend not then his gifts in vain. Suns that set may rise again; But if once we lose this light, ’Tis with us perpetual night. Why should we defer our joys? Fame and rumor are but toys. Cannot we delude the eyes Of a few poor household spies, Or his easier ears beguile, So removèd by our wile? ’Tis no sin love’s fruit to steal; But the sweet thefts to reveal, To be taken, to be seen, These have crimes accounted been.
***
Though beauty be the mark of praise,    And yours of whom I sing be such    As not the world can praise too much, Yet ’tis your virtue now I raise. A virtue, like allay, so gone    Throughout your form, as, though that move    And draw and conquer all men’s love, This sùbjects you to love of one. Wherein you triumph yet; because    ’Tis of yourself, and that you use    The noblest freedom, not to choose Against or faith or honor’s laws. But who should less expect from you,    In whom alone Love lives again?    By whom he is restored to men, And kept, and bred, and brought up true. His falling temples you have reared,    The withered garlands ta’en away;    His altars kept from the decay That envy wished, and nature feared; And on them burn so chaste a flame,    With so much loyalties’ expense,    As Love, t’ acquit such excellence, Is gone himself into your name. And you are he; the deity    To whom all lovers are designed    That would their better objects find; Among which faithful troop am I. Who, as an offspring at your shrine,    Have sung this hymn, and here entreat    One spark of your diviner heat To light upon a love of mine. Which, if it kindle not, but scant    Appear, and that to shortest view,    Yet give me leave t’ adore in you What I in her am grieved to want.
***
               The Turn Brave infant of Saguntum, clear Thy coming forth in that great year, When the prodigious Hannibal did crown His rage with razing your immortal town. Thou, looking then about, Ere thou wert half got out, Wise child, didst hastily return, And mad’st thy mother’s womb thine urn. How summed a circle didst thou leave mankind   Of deepest lore, could we the center find!                The Counterturn Did wiser Nature draw thee back From out the horror of that sack, Where shame, faith, honor, and regard of right Lay trampled on; the deeds of death and night Urged, hurried forth, and hurled Upon th’ affrighted world; Sword, fire, and famine, with fell fury met, And all on utmost ruin set, As, could they but life’s miseries foresee, No doubt all infants would return like thee?                The Stand For what is life, if measured by the space, Not by the act? Or maskèd man, if valued by his face Above his fact? Here’s one outlived his peers And told forth fourscore years; He vexèd time and busied the whole state, Troubled both foes and friends; But ever to no ends: What did this stirrer but die late? How well at twenty had he fall’n or stood! For three of his fourscore he did no good.                The Turn He entered well, by virtuous parts, Got up and thrived with honest arts; He purchased friends, and fame, and honors then, And had his noble name advanced with men; But weary of that flight He stooped in all men’s sight To sordid flatteries, acts of strife, And sunk in that dead sea of life So deep, as he did then death’s waters sup, But that the cork of title buoyed him up.                The Counterturn Alas, but Morison fell young; He never fell, thou fall’st, my tongue. He stood, a soldier to the last right end, A perfect patriot, and a noble friend, But most a virtuous son. All offices were done By him so ample, full, and round, In weight, in measure, number, sound, As, though his age imperfect might appear, His life was of humanity the sphere.                The Stand Go now, and tell out days summed up with fears, And make them years; Produce thy mass of miseries on the stage   To swell thin age; Repeat of things a throng, To show thou hast been long, Not lived; for life doth her great actions spell By what was done and wrought In season, and so brought To light: her measures are, how well Each syllabe answered, and was formed how fair; These make the lines of life, and that’s her air.                The Turn It is not growing like a tree In bulk doth make man better be; Or standing long an oak, three hundred year, To fall a log at last, dry, bald, and sere: A lily of a day Is fairer far in May; Although it fall and die that night, It was the plant and flower of light. In small proportions we just beauties see, And in short measures life may perfect be.                The Counterturn Call, noble Lucius, then for wine, And let thy looks with gladness shine; Accept this garland, plant it on thy head, And think, nay know, thy Morison’s not dead. He leaped the present age, Possessed with holy rage To see that bright eternal day; Of which we priests and poets say Such truths as we expect for happy men, And there he lives with memory, and Ben                The Stand Jonson! who sung thus of him, ere he went Himself to rest, Or taste a part of that full joy he meant   To have expressed   In this bright asterism; Where it were friendship’s schism (Were not his Lucius long with us to tarry) To separate these twi- Lights, the Dioscuri, And keep the one half from his Harry. But fate doth so alternate the design, Whilst that in heaven, this light on earth must shine.                The Turn And shine as you exalted are, Two names of friendship, but one star: Of hearts the union. And those not by chance Made, or indenture, or leased out t’advance The profits for a time. No pleasures vain did chime Of rimes, or riots, at your feasts, Orgies of drink, or feigned protests, But simple love of greatness and of good; That knits brave minds and manners more than blood.                The Counterturn This made you first to know the why You liked, then after to apply That liking, and approach so one the tother, Till either grew a portion of the other: Each styled by his end The copy of his friend. You lived to be the great surnames And titles by which all made claims Unto the virtue. Nothing perfect done, But as a Cary, or a Morison.                The Stand And such a force the fair example had, As they that saw The good, and durst not practice it, were glad That such a law Was left yet to mankind; Where they might read and find Friendship, indeed, was written, not in words; And with the heart, not pen, Of two so early men, Whose lines her rolls were, and recòrds, Who, ere the first down bloomèd on the chin, Had sowed these fruits, and got the harvest in.
***
Though I am young, and cannot tell     Either what Death or Love is well, Yet I have heard they both bear darts,     And both do aim at human hearts. And then again, I have been told     Love wounds with heat, as Death with cold; So that I fear they do but bring     Extremes to touch, and mean one thing. As in a ruin we it call     One thing to be blown up, or fall; Or to our end like way may have     By a flash of lightning, or a wave; So Love’s inflamèd shaft or brand     May kill as soon as Death’s cold hand; Except Love’s fires the virtue have     To fright the frost out of the grave.
***
I that have been a lover, and could show it,   Though not in these, in rithmes not wholly dumb,   Since I exscribe your sonnets, am becomeA better lover, and much better poet.Nor is my Muse or I ashamed to owe it   To those true numerous graces, whereof some   But charm the senses, others overcome   Both brains and hearts; and mine now best do know it:For in your verse all Cupid’s armory,   His flames, his shafts, his quiver, and his bow,   His very eyes are yours to overthrow.But then his mother’s sweets you so apply,   Her joys, her smiles, her loves, as readers take   For Venus’ ceston every line you make.
***
Slow, slow, fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears;  Yet slower, yet, O faintly, gentle springs!  List to the heavy part the music bears,  Woe weeps out her division, when she sings.     Droop herbs and flowers;     Fall grief in showers;     Our beauties are not ours.          O, I could still,  Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,     Drop, drop, drop, drop,Since nature’s pride is now a withered daffodil.
***
Take, oh, take those lips awayThat so sweetly were forswornAnd those eyes, like break of day,Lights that do mislead the morn;But my kisses bring again,Seals of love, though sealed in vain.Hide, oh, hide those hills of snow,Which thy frozen bosom bears,On whose tops the pinks that growAre of those that April wears;But first set my poor heart free,Bound in those icy chains by thee.
***
If thou dislik’st the piece thou light’st on first, Think that of all that I have writ the worst; But if thou read’st my book unto the end, And still dost this and that verse reprehend, O perverse man! If all disgustful be, The extreme scab take thee and thine, for me. 
***
Display thy breasts, my Julia, there let meBehold that circummortal purity;Between whose glories, there my lips I’ll lay,Ravished in that fair Via Lactea.
***
Who is Silvia? what is she,     That all our swains commend her? Holy, fair, and wise is she;     The heaven such grace did lend her, That she might admirèd be. Is she kind as she is fair?     For beauty lives with kindness. Love doth to her eyes repair,     To help him of his blindness; And, being helped, inhabits there. Then to Silvia let us sing,     That Silvia is excelling; She excels each mortal thing     Upon the dull earth dwelling;  To her let us garlands bring
***
Here she lies, a pretty bud, Lately made of flesh and blood, Who as soon fell fast asleep As her little eyes did peep. Give her strewings, but not stir The earth that lightly covers her.
***
Kind are her answers,  But her performance keeps no day;  Breaks time, as dancers  From their own music when they stray:  All her free favorsAnd smooth words wing my hopes in vain.O did ever voice so sweet but only feign?  Can true love yield such delay,  Converting joy to pain?  Lost is our freedom,  When we submit to women so:  Why do we need ’em,  When in their best they work our woe?  There is no wisdomCan alter ends, by Fate prefixed.O why is the good of man with evil mixed?  Never were days yet called two,  But one night went betwixt.
***
In this little urn is laid Prudence Baldwin, once my maid, From whose happy spark here let Spring the purple violet.
***
Here lies Jonson with the rest Of the poets; but the best. Reader, would’st thou more have known? Ask his story, not this stone. That will speak what this can’t tell Of his glory. So farewell.
***
            Fame’s pillar here at last we set,             Out-during marble, brass or jet;                 Charmed and enchanted so                   As to withstand the blow                      O f   o v e r t h r o w ;                     Nor   shall   the   seas,                       Or     o u t r a g e s                     Of   storms,   o’erbear                      What    we    uprear;                     Tho’   kingdoms   fall,                  This   pillar   never   shall                  Decline   or waste at   all;         But   stand   for ever   by   his   own         Firm   and    well-fixed    foundation.
***
God will have all, or none; serve Him, or fall Down before Baal, Bel, or Belial: Either be hot, or cold: God doth despise, Abhorre, and spew out all Neutralities.
***
Weigh me the fire; or canst thou find A way to measure out the wind? Distinguish all those floods that are Mixed in that wat’ry theater, And taste thou them as saltless there, As in their channel first they were.   Tell me the people that do keep Within the kingdoms of the deep; Or fetch me back that cloud again, Beshivered into seeds of rain. Tell me the motes, dust, sands, and spears Of corn, when summer shakes his ears; Show me that world of stars, and whence They noiseless spill their influence. This if thou canst; then show me Him That rides the glorious cherubim.
***
      In this world, the isle of dreams,       While we sit by sorrow’s streams,       Tears and terrors are our themes                      Reciting:       But when once from hence we fly,       More and more approaching nigh              Unto young eternity,                      Uniting:        In that whiter island, where        Things are evermore sincere;        Candor here and luster there                    Delighting:     There no monstrous fancies shall        Out of hell an horror call,        To create, or cause at all,                   Affrighting.     There, in calm and cooling sleep       We our eyes shall never steep,        But eternal watch shall keep,                    Attending     Pleasures, such as shall pursue          Me immortalized, and you;         And fresh joys, as never too                   Have ending.
***
Having been tenant long to a rich lord,     Not thriving, I resolvèd to be bold,     And make a suit unto him, to afford A new small-rented lease, and cancel th’ old. In heaven at his manor I him sought;     They told me there that he was lately gone     About some land, which he had dearly bought Long since on earth, to take possessiòn. I straight returned, and knowing his great birth,     Sought him accordingly in great resorts;     In cities, theaters, gardens, parks, and courts; At length I heard a ragged noise and mirth               Of thieves and murderers; there I him espied,     Who straight, Your suit is granted, said, and died.
***
Lord, how can man preach thy eternal word?     He is a brittle crazy glass; Yet in thy temple thou dost him afford     This glorious and transcendent place,     To be a window, through thy grace. But when thou dost anneal in glass thy story,     Making thy life to shine within The holy preachers, then the light and glory     More reverend grows, and more doth win;     Which else shows waterish, bleak, and thin. Doctrine and life, colors and light, in one     When they combine and mingle, bring A strong regard and awe; but speech alone     Doth vanish like a flaring thing,     And in the ear, not conscience, ring.
***
When my devotions could not pierce                    Thy silent ears,Then was my heart broken, as was my verse;      My breast was full of fears                    And disorder.   My bent thoughts, like a brittle bow,                     Did fly asunder:Each took his way; some would to pleasures go,       Some to the wars and thunder                     Of alarms.   “As good go anywhere,” they say,                     “As to benumbBoth knees and heart, in crying night and day,Come, come, my God, O come!                      But no hearing.”   O that thou shouldst give dust a tongue                     To cry to thee,And then not hear it crying! All day long       My heart was in my knee,                     But no hearing.   Therefore my soul lay out of sight,                     Untuned, unstrung:My feeble spirit, unable to look right,       Like a nipped blossom, hung                     Discontented.   O cheer and tune my heartless breast,                     Defer no time;That so thy favors granting my request,       They and my mind may chime,                     And mend my rhyme.
***
The fleet astronomer can bore And thread the spheres with his quick-piercing mind: He views their stations, walks from door to door,          Surveys, as if he had designed To make a purchase there; he sees their dances,                    And knoweth long before Both their full-eyes aspècts, and secret glances.          The nimble diver with his side Cuts through the working waves, that he may fetch His dearly-earnèd pearl, which God did hide          On purpose from the venturous wretch; That he might save his life, and also hers                    Who with excessive pride Her own destruction and his danger wears.          The subtle chymic can divest And strip the creature naked, till he find The callow principles within their nest:          There he imparts to them his mind, Admitted to their bed-chamber, before                    They appear trim and dressed To ordinary suitors at the door.          What hath not man sought out and found, But his dear God? who yet his glorious law Embosoms in us, mellowing the ground          With showers and frosts, with love and awe, So that we need not say, “Where’s this command?”                    Poor man, thou searchest round To find out death, but missest life at hand.
***
I made a posy, while the day ran by: “Here will I smell my remnant out, and tie                            My life within this band.” But Time did beckon to the flowers, and they By noon most cunningly did steal away,                            And withered in my hand. My hand was next to them, and then my heart; I took, without more thinking, in good part                            Time’s gentle admonition; Who did so sweetly death’s sad taste convey, Making my mind to smell my fatal day,                            Yet, sug’ring the suspicion. Farewell dear flowers, sweetly your time ye spent, Fit, while ye lived, for smell or ornament,                            And after death for cures. I follow straight without complaints or grief, Since, if my scent be good, I care not if                            It be as short as yours.
***
How fresh, oh Lord, how sweet and clean Are thy returns! even as the flowers in spring;          To which, besides their own demean, The late-past frosts tributes of pleasure bring.                       Grief melts away                       Like snow in May,          As if there were no such cold thing.          Who would have thought my shriveled heart Could have recovered greenness? It was gone          Quite underground; as flowers depart To see their mother-root, when they have blown,                       Where they together                       All the hard weather,          Dead to the world, keep house unknown.          These are thy wonders, Lord of power, Killing and quickening, bringing down to hell          And up to heaven in an hour; Making a chiming of a passing-bell.                       We say amiss                       This or that is:          Thy word is all, if we could spell.          Oh that I once past changing were, Fast in thy Paradise, where no flower can wither!          Many a spring I shoot up fair, Offering at heaven, growing and groaning thither;                       Nor doth my flower                       Want a spring shower,          My sins and I joining together.          But while I grow in a straight line, Still upwards bent, as if heaven were mine own,          Thy anger comes, and I decline: What frost to that? what pole is not the zone                       Where all things burn,                       When thou dost turn,          And the least frown of thine is shown?          And now in age I bud again, After so many deaths I live and write;          I once more smell the dew and rain, And relish versing. Oh, my only light,                       It cannot be                       That I am he          On whom thy tempests fell all night.          These are thy wonders, Lord of love, To make us see we are but flowers that glide;          Which when we once can find and prove, Thou hast a garden for us where to bide;                       Who would be more,                       Swelling through store,          Forfeit their Paradise by their pride.
***
The harbingers are come. See, see their mark: White is their color, and behold my head. But must they have my brain? Must they dispark Those sparkling notions, which therein were bred?     Must dullness turn me to a clod? Yet have they left me, Thou art still my God. Good men ye be, to leave me my best room, Ev’n all my heart, and what is lodgèd there:   I pass not, I, what of the rest become, So Thou art still my God be out of fear.     He will be pleasèd with that ditty: And if I please him, I write fine and witty. Farewell sweet phrases, lovely metaphors. But will ye leave me thus? When ye before Of stews and brothels only knew the doors, Then did I wash you with my tears, and more,     Brought you to church well dressed and clad: My God must have my best, ev’n all I had. Lovely enchanting language, sugar-cane, Honey of roses, wither wilt thou fly? Hath some fond lover ’ticed thee to thy bane? And wilt thou leave the church and love a sty?          Fie, thou wilt soil thy broidered coat, And hurt thyself, and him that sings the note. Let foolish lovers, if they will love dung, With canvas, not with arras, clothe their shame: Let folly speak in her own native tongue. True beauty dwells on high: ours is a flame     But borrowed thence to light us thither. Beauty and beauteous words should go together. Yet if you go, I pass not; take your way: For Thou art still my God is all that ye Perhaps with more embellishment can say. Go, birds of spring: let winter have his fee;     Let a bleak paleness chalk the door, So all within be livelier than before.
***
Throw away thy rod, Throw away thy wrath:                   O my God, Take the gentle path. For my heart’s desire Unto thine is bent:                   I aspire To a full consent. Not a word or look I affect to own,                   But by book, And thy book alone. Though I fail, I weep: Though I halt in pace,                   Yet I creep To the throne of grace. Then let wrath remove; Love will do the deed:                   For with love Stony hearts will bleed. Love is swift of foot; Love’s a man of war,                   And can shoot, And can hit from far. Who can ’scape his bow? That which wrought on thee,                   Brought thee low, Needs must work on me. Throw away thy rod; Though man frailties hath,          Thou art God: Throw away thy wrath.
***
Death, thou wast once an uncouth hideous thing,                            Nothing but bones,       The sad effect of sadder groans: Thy mouth was open, but thou couldst not sing. For we considered thee as at some six                            Or ten years hence,       After the loss of life and sense, Flesh being turned to dust, and bones to sticks. We looked on this side of thee, shooting short;                          Where we did find       The shells of fledge souls left behind, Dry dust, which sheds no tears, but may extort. But since our Savior’s death did put some blood                            Into thy face,       Thou art grown fair and full of grace, Much in request, much sought for as a good. For we do now behold thee gay and glad,                            As at Doomsday;       When souls shall wear their new array, And all thy bones with beauty shall be clad. Therefore we can go die as sleep, and trust                            Half that we have       Unto an honest faithful grave; Making our pillows either down, or dust.
***
The lad came to the door at night,     When lovers crown their vows, And whistled soft and out of sight     In shadow of the boughs. ‘I shall not vex you with my face     Henceforth, my love, for aye; So take me in your arms a space     Before the east is grey. ‘When I from hence away am past     I shall not find a bride, And you shall be the first and last     I ever lay beside.’ She heard and went and knew not why;     Her heart to his she laid; Light was the air beneath the sky     But dark under the shade. ‘Oh do you breathe, lad, that your breast     Seems not to rise and fall, And here upon my bosom prest     There beats no heart at all?’ ‘Oh loud, my girl, it once would knock,     You should have felt it then; But since for you I stopped the clock     It never goes again.’ ‘Oh lad, what is it, lad, that drips     Wet from your neck on mine? What is it falling on my lips,     My lad, that tastes of brine?’ ‘Oh like enough ’tis blood, my dear,     For when the knife has slit The throat across from ear to ear     ’Twill bleed because of it.’
***
Having returned at last and being carefully seated On the floor—somebody else's floor, as usual— Far away across that ocean which looked Through Newport windows years ago—somebody else's livingroom— Another messed-up weedy garden Tall floppy improbably red flowers All the leaves turned over in the rain Ridged furry scrotum veins Hedges glisten tile roof tin roof telephone pole Decoratively tormented black pine Slowly repeating its careful program Endlessly regretting but here is original done once Not to be reproduced nor electronically remembered                   Loosen up.    Festoon. An enormous drop of pure water suddenly there Right in the center of preceding page Nothing can be done about that. The line was ruined. OK. Belt hair. A bend is funnier. Bar Kochba. Do something About it. Like animal factory mayhem. The master said, "You shouldn't have put Yourself into such a position In the first place." Nevertheless, It all looks different, right to left. Another master said, "Well, You can always take more, you know." The wind went by just now South Dakota. Who's responsible for this Absurd revival of the Byzantine Empire, Sioux Falls-Mitchell-Yankton area? Further anomalies of this order will receive Such punishment as a Court Martial may direct Or the discretion of the Company Commander Failure to conform with these regulations Shall be punished by Court Martial TAKE ALL YOU WANT BUT EAT ALL YOU TAKE The following named Enlisted Men are transf RESTRICTED, SPECIAL ORDER #21 this HQ dd 8 Feb 1946 contained 6 Pars.C E N S O R E D 3. Fol EM, White, MCO indicated, ASRS indicated, AF2AF, are reld fr asgmt and dy this HQ and trfd in gr to 37th AAFBU, Dorje Field, Lhasa, TIBET and WP at such time as will enable them to arrive therat not later than 20 Feb 1946 rptg to CO for dy C E N S O R E D Or such punishment as a Court Martial may direct                    I used to travel that way. Always take a little more. This is called "A controlled habit." (Don't look at me, I never said a murmuring word.) Didn't you say, "polished water?" I normally wouldn't say so. Wasp in the bookshelf rejects Walt Whitman, Herman Melville, Emily Dickinson, The Goliard Poets, A Vedic Reader, Lama Govinda, Medival French Verses & Romances, Long Discourses of the Buddha, and The Principal Upanishads. Window glass reads more entertainingly But soon that too is left for the foxtail grass Camellia hedge, the dull mid-morning sun followed by accidental descent into goofball drift unintentionally but such is the cost of knowledge recollections of Jack in Berkeley Nembies & grass & wine Geraniums, ripe apricots, & plums Clio's green and slanting eyes Gentle smile of pointed face How much love I owe to her and to all women My mother tried to warn me, "Let your sister ride the bike a while; Don't be so damned selfish!" How can Victorian American lady Explain to her son that his cock Doesn't belong exclusively to himself But also to certain future women? It's a matter of some reassurance That we are physically indistinguishable from other men. When introspection shows us That we have different degrees of intelligence Varying capacities for knowing morality We lose something of our complacency Rooty-toot Rooty-toot We're the boys From the Institute I wondered recently what school was being lampooned In this impudent snatch of gradeschool melody Recollection of obscene & early childhood. If Socrates and Plato and Diotima And all the rest of the folks at that party Had simply eaten lots of food and wine and dope And spent the entire weekend in bed together Perhaps Western Civilization Wouldn't have been such a failure? Rooty-toot, Plato's Original Institute Much of the morning sweeping consists of clearing away Bodies of several hundred insects who followed my lightglobes And perished here. After 49 days each one of them will be reborn Each in a different shape in a different world Each according to the quality of his actions In all his past existences. What a system. Hi-de-ho. Rooty-toot-toot. Normally I wouldn't say no. Rooty-toot is what any bugle, horn or trumpet Is thought of as "saying," the sound of a fart. Years later I found the trumpeting devils in the Inferno                       M U S H All dropped untidy into the bottom of my skull A warped red plastic phonograph record (the labels says Emperor Concerto) floats on top, inaudible; Nevertheless, light comes through it in a pleasant way Precisely the color of raspberry licorice whips. It got bent in the mail, too near the steampipes... The music is in there someplace, squeezed into plastic At enormous expense of knowledge,                   "FIRE IN THE BORGO" luke-warm mush, then cold milk poured over it chills and transforms the entire arrangement gradually tending towards an ineradicable (nonbiodegradable) plastic resembling "Bakelite," shiny brown It shatters if you drop it hard Changed again! Turned 180 degrees in an Unexpected direction Bent Beethoven, Burnt Njal I have lived All these years until this moment Without understanding there's absolutely nothing Which I can do well                       (RING BELL THREE TIMES)        N O T H I N G "Har-de-har." What do you mean, "Har-de-har"? Nothing, just "Har-de-har." I might have said, "Hi-de-ho." "O Mighty Nothing!"       (How does the Wicked Earl begin?)        "Then all proceeded from the great united..."              (what?)        "And from thy frutiful emptiness's hand        Snatch'd Men, Beasts, Birds, Fire (Water), Air and Land" John Wilmot Earl of Rochester. The parenthesized water is presented to us On good authority by the Editor, Vivian De Sola Pinto. I found my mother's name Written there three hundred years ago. "I don't know whether we can or not. Hee-hee! Let's try!"                       W A L K   L I G H T! I don't know anything about it There are two long-bearded apprehensive gremlins One beside each of my ears. The left-hand one Very gently whispers, "Hello?" and Listens for a reply from the other side. He repeats, "Hello?" very softly. "Are you Still there?" And the right-hand one listening And nodding, his own ear turned towards that furry dark Pink and lavender cave. Presently he replies (Also very softly) "Hello!" Across the blank echoing empty dark between. I think I'll go take a bath. Well, come on, who is it, if it isn't for gremlins— Some other of those revolting British creations for children Subject of PhD theses in American universities Big eyes, charm, lots of fur all over Stage-set by Arthur Rackham I'm really going to take a bath now. I split wood (gift of the landlord) while water Plooshes into iron pot. Make fire underneath. Bless these elements! Their nature and use   Connect me to this place (The Capital) its history Temple bell rings (No Self. No Permanence.) Fiery waters all around The iron bathtub is history, its name, goemon-buro A Goemon bath, he was a highway robber, caught at last And cooked to death in a pot of boiling oil On the bank of the Kamo River. Unveiling and Elevation of the Wienie                (RING GONG THREE TIMES) Kyoto October 2, 1969 a graceful poem In fond & grateful memory of Mr W. S. All Happinesse Outline of Hieizan almost invisible behind the hedge (Not my hedge but the one at Daitokuji Hojo) Kamo River uniform white lines pouring down Solidly moulded over stone barrage Foam across great fitted paving blocks (The Dalles!) Its man-made bed                          rowdy-dow                                        beyond the foam thick purple From dye-vats along Takano River Green shaved patch on dark moutainside    DAIMONJI which we saw as a pattern of fire from Arashiyama Bridge paper lanterns floating in the River Oi Souls returning to the flowery shore, the Wind's Angelic Face Puffing, happy Wallace Stevens Birthday Heavenly Baroque paradise where he sails Far New Haven's Other Shore Cherubic winds flap his coronation robes Dash silver on his golden harp and starry brow An extravagant Handelian heaven Lavender wings of peacock feather eyes All Memling enamel (Mr Yeats a little jealous) Harps of "omnipotent power"        ("OHO, OMNIPOTENT POW-ER        OHO! OH JOY DIVINE!"        Gregory Corso imitating Peter Ustinov Nero-movie) Too busy to see anyone in New York A few French paintings, shoeshine New tweed English pants two pounds real Camembert cheese Who is there to see in New York anyway Everybody's moved to Balinas (I dreamed last night of Margot Doss) And so home again, among roses "Arcades of Philadelphia The Past" a piece of Idaho scenic agate A crystal ball "Of Hartford in a Purple Light" And supper on "An Ordinary Evening in New Haven" Where you never lived but always heaven Along with Stéphane Mallarmé and all the marble swans. I keep thinking about all the really great ones (To paraphrase Mr Spender) I think Like anybody living in a foreign country Of home and money... There's probably Some sensible human way of living in America Without being rich or drunk or taking dope all the time FRED, IS THAT MUSIC? DO I SHAKE OR WEEP? 3:X:69 Thomas Wolfe's Birthday "he'd say ok and we'd start in and every time I'd presently find myself going involuntarily ulk, ulk, ulk, which seemed to inspire him to even wilder extravagances," FRED IS THAT MUSIC? DO I FAKE OR LEAP? To my horror & chagrin I see that I've suppressed Lots of goody in the process of copying from ms to typewriter; Mike warned me years ago, "You should always Make them reproduce your handwritten pages."                    ( O V E R L A P ) overleaf clover I said                      rowdy-dow                      (picture of leaves)                                                     poo. beyond the foam thick purple. Takano River dye-vats there's not a way in the world I can explain to you you just have to get in and start doing it yourself     green shaved patch     right half of the big DAIMONJI "Every place is the same Because I felt the same, remembering everything We boated for hours on the Lake of Constance Went swimming in the Blue Grotto, ate sheep's eyes And chicken guts in Crete. The blue tiles of Isfahan Were better or worse than the blue tiles around the late Mr__,his swimming pool at San Simeon." And the man from Intourist at Tbilisi who so much Resembled him: "Everything being the same everything is naturally different" Here in the Shinshindo Coffee Shop again that blonde young lady who just disappeared into— and so swiftly reappeared out of—the benjo was not that funny girl who used to write for Newsweek but may as well have been— right this minute asleep in London, Sydney or Tashkent three new little trees just beyond north end of goldfish pond. I peer among the branches in search of the blonde who now sits inside I am in arbor outside the number of goldfish seven or nine One is color of polished metal that girl's hair is a paler shade (streetcar fills the window 1 1/2 seconds) the hard chairs and benches here, big tables probably not like the ones in Reed College library. Fits of psychic imperialism I attach tags, carve initials, pee on fireplugs outlining my territory is that blonde still there sort of ecru-colored minidress, thin cloth, heavy coat thick pale hair, untidy braid half undone behind small pointy nose, chin recedes a little there's no point in returning until I find out why did I have to come all the way back here endless belt of punch-cards travels through the neighbor's loom repetition of a pattern from a long time back here's one who eats a hardboiled egg, rolls, hot milk and a picture magazine. His friend's weak eyes read a little book German metaphysics translated into literary Japanese vague to vague two giant galaxies passing through into and beyond each   other, a radio receiver on a planet several thousand light years off might well tune in on a stupendous music,        FOOOREENG! &c (Karl-Heinz Stockausen) chancre star                 when you get to the end,                                stop Bill Whosis drunk & yelling in front of Sanjo Station End of the Tokaido Road Kamogawa sluicing fast under Sanjo Bridge The wooden posts and railings shown by Hokusai guard the asphalt concrete way     "Why don't you walk?" a way of living in America doesn't really invite a narrow pen point plink under they penthouse lid they eye they milky forehead, Yaquina Bay, Yachats, Neptune Park (Tillie the Whale flashes past just north or south of Yachats?) I can imagine living there as my grandmother did gathering wild blackberries driving out towards Gresham for a mess of green corn time for melons, grapes & Chinook salmon at The Dalles, dig mud clams at Netarts Bay Family all over the place, friends from the old Kilpatrick Hotel, bring blackberry jam fresh string beans and salmon She wanted her hotel in winter good steam heat, parties and dances The Lonesome Club, Cotillion Ballroom Earliest spring flowers and pussywillows Green slime and moss and mud evergreen and fern smell of woman, beyond enormous plate-glass windows The Studebaker black sedan. All this lost again, galmed up for fair where's the minute particulars? what was I thinking of? I keep thinking of those really great ones like Confucius: "What am I supposed to do, become rich & famous?" People keep introducing me to the famous English Poet We have been introduced to each other once every ten years For a very long time. He has no reason to remember meeting Me, since the conversation is limited to "how do you do?" And he's considerably taller than I am. I think all the time I can't forgive him For jamming that "nk" sound against the initial "C" Nor for the blackmail word, "truly" I can't stop thinking about ... I keep thinking all the time about those Absolutely splendid                       (that isn't so sharp, either) Well, somewhere there's an exact & absolutely wild poetical equivalent to Mr X's most often quoted line, & if he had found it & used it I should have swooned with awe & pleasure when I was first introduced to him, & afterwards we might have been able to talk together? Fred, is that music? Do I shake or weep? Did you fall or was you pushed? Did I run and was I tired Years gone by, twelve years agone I must have had about me then some final faded blink of beauty Fred asked me to marry him, he would be 21 fairly soon I never had a greater compliment. It's too bad we were sexually incompatible He's the only one who ever asked me. No matter how odd the fancy I remember him Happily at the entrance to old age I haven't been a total failure after all. Paul Gauguin went someplace there was light enough to see And it made him a painter. (?) N. Hawthorne to Italy H. Melville to the Southern Sea, beyond the neighborhood of Christian gentlefolk Fred, is that music that I fake or leap? Lion-faced Paul Gauguin fingers and toes Cock and nose all sloughing gradually away Leprosy melted him, northern snowman Disadvantages of a lovely climate "White men go to pieces in the Tropics" I can't stop thinking about those who really knew What they were doing, Paul Gauguin, John Wieners, LeRoi Jones I keep thinking of those great ones who never fled the music Fred and his roommate with bottled hair All of them yarded off to Viet Nam Translated into Rugged American Fighting Men Defending the Free World against Godless Atheistic Communism                      ("I am a U.S. Marine.                      I like to fuck and I like to fight:                      What's it going to be?") Which makes it impossible to like the Illiad Sadist faggotry too much like Parris Island The Green Berets and the cops back home Somebody else's castration fantasies acted out In an ideal climate                       but why should the world be different                       Why should it continue in its present                       nasty way? and it changes every                       nanosecond, lovely, dreadful, smashed                       dismembered and devoured by prajna                       Events like the Indo-China War                       Final quivers and tremblings                       Neural flashes in freshly killed men                       (movie of Bonnie & Clyde) The longer I think about it The more I doubt that there is such a thing as Western Civilization. A puritan commercial culture Was transplanted from Europe to U.S.A. in the 17th Century American Indians were a civilized people. I remember when L.A. had an ideal climate        "Everybody wants complete privacy in the Hollywood Hills        for $35 a month," the real estate lady told C.L.T.        She wore this big Marianne Moore garden party hat        rocky face petrified lap-dog. "You don't want to        live over there, Honey, there's Dark Clouds in that          neighborhood." C. & Shirley escaped to Europe and New Mexico Bottom of my waterglass, pentagonal crystal The light changes passing through, bent by glass into color and we are a rainbow, no matter how we love or hate it We are beautiful red and black and yellow and brown and white Maybe a few Swedes or Finns are green in the winter time If they get cold enough. How can we not be miraculously Beautiful colors which betray our true nature which is love And wisdom, compassion and enlightenment, "Six times three is eighteen" In Takagamine tiny old lady turns towards a Jizo shrine Across the street, A short prayer, umbrella in one hand, the other held up Before her (gassho) and then bowed very slowly (She really meant it) first head and neck, and then The waist, very slowly down and back again. Jizo-samma certainly must have felt obliged To attend immediately and in person to that lady's Children and departed relatives. Being Jizo-samma He has exactly time and energy and compassion enough To do exactly that, right now. can this be straight description of observation without intending to embarrass or attack anybody, without waving my arms and yelling does Mr Gauguin's palette go towards a muddiness even the tropical pictures are faintly greyed fluorescent lights in gallery (Kyoto Municipal Museum) varnish going bad or the pigments themselves breaking down? look again fishpond looks clean fish are newly polished Frog-child's baby sister has come to ride her tricycle orange teddy-bear strapped to her back the same way her mother carries her The papa comes to pound a large flat shoe on fishpond rim fish whirl round in fits, then he scatters crumbs on water goldfish feed There is a wonderful kind of writing Which is never written    NOW About this moment. It's always done later And redone until it is perfect. Praying mantis moored to top of a flower stalk Grooms itself like a canary Preens Two tailfeathers I wonder whether Wordsworth was subject to fits Of feeblemindedness or simply had a low opinion Of his readers? Bigger mantis upside-down on glass door. Who else has a face like that: hammerhead shark another cannibal Strong mothball smell emanates form English poetry & prose After the death of Wm Blake...or a little before It is detectable in Keats, Shelley, Byron...mothballs And flannel. Smell of Established Church. Industrialism And Empire building: same Whiggery rules us now I've got to go sort out my guts. "What have you been doing these days?" Just sorting out my guts. disentangling and Re-coiling them neatly back in place The same operation must be performed Upon the telephone cord, every now and again Je m'en vais à le Toji, in memory of Kobo Daishi Fleamarket day.                       I greet you from the very top of the page an single branch of stovewood smolders under the bathtub, the brand of Meleager still high but able to cook, eat, write, make bath, SWEAT they ring the bell again I hope all sentient beings attain complete perfect final enlightenment which is exactly who I am or not all my greasy fingers coffee-break time down at the Emergency Factory early in the war, before we all got uniform shot but now you are trying to confuse me about having my eyes shut My name is Chauncey M. Depew and it is November 11, 1910 What do you think of that, hey? STOP IT, I SAY, STOP THIS TRUMPERY OF MOCKERY mockery trumpery pink chenille fuzz elephant baby mockery trumpery trumpery mockery mongery            freeny-monger?                     fundle Our main difficulty: fear and distrust of freedom We think it must be carefully measured Weighed and doled out in discreet quantities To responsible persons of good character and high Social standing; people with lots of money which is evidence Of their reliability and moral quality Liberty in other hands is "license" Difficulties compounded by idea of "consent" And theory of "delegated powers." Hire specialists to run everything. But the powers they derive from us Relieve these governors of all responsibility Somehow become vast personal wealth— Fortunes which must be protected from "license" and        "the violence of the mob" We find our freedom diminished (KING LEAR) Delegation a license for the abuse of power                                           say, just what are you trying        to prove, anyway? What do I care about proving anything Only bust chains & shackles that we may slip anchor Haul-ass away to the making of Paradise Where now are only fraudulent states, paint-factories Lies and stinks and wars One kid put it clear as may be: "I want America to be magic electrical Tibet" Or Kozanji, for example, a little NW of the Capital Absolutely defenseless, abbot's house on pointed mountain Top, delicate walls Multitudes of people drifting through it Footless ghosts, no fingers, empty parkas The billows of smoke of burnt and burning leaves The silence, unbroken purity existing in the world Cuts down impatience Leaf jewels rage and brilliant silence Cold flames: Fudo-Myo-o Carved fire, sculptured flame world net wall Momentary bird-heads eyes beaks all swirl crimson ray Beams yellow streaked. He isn't in the fire he's made of it The light cool zap-energy sword the gentle hat of lotus flower Big square feet on solid rock Takao-yama As I looked at them they must see me, flaming All absurd, film of mistaken proprieties Culture of dim Oregon farmhouse to burn to dispose of Instantly If what is real can be created or destroyed Clouds move above maples Change colors we walk beneath Colored spaces mean something else— Where in all this tight and elegant disorder . . . . . .   Walk on down Kiyotaki River canyon from Jingoji   Missed the trail, found confluence of Kiyotaki and Hozu rivers   Smooth grey-green cliffs of single rock   Heavy green water, no way back to the Capital   Except by boat, voyage in raging maple colors   Over dragon rocks of dream. Late extravagant lunch, Arashiyama, Hurricane Ridge I just reread a little of The Prelude To which I could only reply, “You poor fish.”                       GOD KNOWS THE SPARROW FELL:                       GOD SHOVED HIM. Let’s go visit the tomb of Emperor Murakami Look at autumn leaves but there light rain starts falling I had hoped to visit big rock on the hillside, also But came back home I want my umbrella I want my lunch                       RAIN serious, wet rain                         discovered the tomb of KOKO TENNO Between the parkway and the trolley track due south of noodle   shop RAY OF FILIAL DUTY who ordered the Ninnaji to be And the next emperor was first abbot there: UDA TENNO His Muroji Palace Here come the maidens dancing That song they are singing that song which you shall Be listening is call “The Song of the Panicled Millet” In the Chinese classical node In America we’ve been fighting each other 100 years We pretend we’re unimaginably rich But we are poor and afraid of the poor who must become The Army to defend us against right and wrong All automatic and impersonal The Law is The Government Shall take all your money and kill you Being completely free and entirely, impartially just Edgar Allan Poe saw the walls of Plato’s Cave Slowly moving inwards to crush us Who licks up the juice that runs out at the bottom? The real shame of America is the lack of an anticlerical Movement or party. All parties try to compound   With invisible State Protestant Church that theoretically Doesn’t exist. Rubes who think of themselves as   Members in good standing are bilked and robbed. I got to buy me them eggs. 30 MORE SHOPPING DAYS UNTIL CHRISTMAS!        “again and again the flames of his inordinate Passion   licked my naked flesh again.” 29 MORE SHOPPING DAYS UNTIL CHRISTMAS! “rolled right over until I was over the top of him did   you ever hear of such a thing I said Wilbur what on earth are   you trying to do and he was wiggling and shaking and squeezing   and panting and saying all them things over again like he was   going crazy until I didn’t know whether to send for the doctor or the fire department but he stopped all of sudden you know   how they do and that nasty stuff all over everything I tell you   if I had it to do over again I’d never get married and Wilbur   is my third husband” 28 MORE SHOPPING DAYS BEFORE THE FEAST OF          THE NATIVITY "then he turns right around and wants to do it again well I said listen you old goat I've got to get some rest I've got to   go shopping tomorrow whether you go to work or not" 27 MORE SHOPPING DAYS UNTIL CHRISTMAS                                              Fred, is that music? Ah, no, my foolish darling It is only the roaring of the aged chilling blood Sluggishly perambulating your brittle veins you forgot Your bloodpressure pills again, too busy to go out They brought you three dead sandwiches upon a tray And coffee, tepid black forbidden coffee On a tray and you lost your temper on the telephone And now it echoes in your hollow empty wooden head                               I’m not afraid of you.                               You’re nothing but an incubus. TWENTY-SIX GREATER AND LARGER SHOPPING DAYS          BEFORE CHRISTMAS So you’re a poet, hey? Well if you’re a poet Tell me a poem. Come on, tell me one. Are you a published poet? Do you know Nick Crome? One fine day AG was mad at me and said, “You’re going to be a little old man who smells of kerosene and sits in the public library every day reading Pliny” Awoke at quarter-past three   A.M. strange wooden clack sound Later find fallen mud-plaster chunk in tokonoma Puddle of pee with one long black hair in the corner of benjo   floor Gloomy gold morning ten A.M. ingest giant lump of bhang With strawberry jam from Bulgaria (friendly socialist country) Hot coffee. Things will seem better half an hour from now, OK? Shut up. What’s the use of having a cold if nobody cares. Why not simply do something else. An absolute mystery: how to stop and begin differently. “Don’t be a ninny, Dr. Culpepper, all surgery is radical Hand me that there Gigli-saw. Yes, yes, it all Connects, have no fear, we can take a tuck in the membrane If necessary. Try to develop a little more dexterity— Have you tried practicing the piano or the guitar? Us brain surgeons got to how a little culture. Quit banging my elbow, nurse.” Fifty years fighting the Bolsheviki To maintain a 500% profit on every waffle-iron and locomotive At 499% times are growing difficult, we must try to retrench At 497^% lay off some of the newer employees the market looks “Bearish” at 496%  SELL OUT while there’s still a chance. In order to boost profits back to 498% A “presence” appears in Cambodia When did the dumb-bunny bomb first hit U.S.A.? How come everybody appreciated it so much? THE BAD NEWS INCUBUS SERVICE          “I’m going to get well right away.          I’m going to be just fine,” the old man said;          Then his eyes rolled up and his breath stop          And there he lay dead as a flounder. Lost again yesterday walking towards Arashiyama Inconveniently: lunchtime. Several villages, Tomb of the Emperor Uda, deserted superhighway to Western Hills I thought of asking somebody, “This the road to China?” I really knew where I was, I’d been to those mountains The empty freeway bored and frightened me Broken highway to a pretty place where I bought expensive   noodles Well, it opened up a space, I could see the distance, for a   change Breathe. Did I miss nine trillion cars, want them to be On this road with me? At home, the vegetable supply A Dutch still-life set on reversed lid of nabe Half a red carrot half a giant radish half a head of hokusai A completely monumental potato China will sail across big Zen soup to me THE BAD NEWS INCUBUS SERVICE          They peer down through my ceiling          “Poor old man he’s too fat to live much longer”          Which part of this bothers me most—          Insincerity, indifference or the fraudulent ceiling? Voices out of the air the bleak and windy white skull attic Flat white for lots of light Hollow wooden head son of a bitch, Homer Matson used to say I keep trying to remember that this is my life now What I’ve got, what I actively chose Pine tree stone lanterns outside the mason’s house imperial   tomb Camellia hedge monkey-slide tree And the responsibility for learning two languages (which I evade) and dim insistences of two others in the background Sanskrit and Tibetan.       awk!                            WHY DID I LAUGH TO-NIGHT?                            NO VOICE. At the foot of the stonewall Fukuoji Jinsha Somebody took leave of her shoes; There they are. Red. Strangely enough I find that I’m all right Nothing's really wrong with me, there’s food Payday will be Thursday the pleasure of looking at A tiny mountain of low-grade amethyst Almost the color of gas flame cooking buckwheat noodles (kerosene is on the way) The cold weather is neither monster nor prodigy I seem to survive it (Vitamin C) in spite of paranoia (Vitamin B-complex shortages?). In winter the air is cold as it is hot in summer But I never can understand the idea All too soon I must leave these beauties And come away to heaven’s boring towers of golden flapping Snowy wings and halo bright star crown No more to see your sexy frown and freckles                            (“I can’t find my mirror!                            I can’t find my things!”) So that when you’ve at last arrived there too Shall we bleak and holy strangers distant forgiving nod and   smile? But soon you’ll be asking me, “How do I look? Is my halo all right? I know my wings are all slaunch-wise Along the trailing edge.” (Preen, preen.) “I wish I had My mirror, Kids! I wish I had all my things Oh well I don’t care please hold me I want you to hang onto me a   while.” Torn paper fake mountains become three-dimensional Transparent crystals. Bushes and trees all Barbered and shaved plaques of tourmaline, emerald They used to tell me I must apply myself   Work hard and don’t be lazy But what I must learn is to accomplish everything Which has nothing to do with work. Work is what an instrument or engine does. We say a crystal changes white light to green Breaks light into rainbow, scatters it Focuses to burning point. The crystal does Nothing. Its shape and structure make all The difference. Think of transistors and lasers. In order to make this day great Yesterday must be altered Rain I must wear overcoat muffler and bamboo umbrella Thinking of monkey tribes on Hieizan and Iwatayama Wet & freezing I hope they’re finding food Lovely bronze-green fur, defenseless eyes They run if you stare at them: Fixed gaze prepares for pounce crunch fangs of death All monkies everywhere look worried all the time Eyes and faces, Oh God, what next. Me?” Lots of instructions wasted Go down town and argue with the bank Fall, as leap Fred? Yesterday afternoon they said They’d pay in the morning. This morning they say They’ll pay in the afternoon Raving hot sunshine two days before Christmas                 BAFFLEMUTE & so to Osaka.                 Beguile me with all them blandishments again! Cursus:          The hotel falls. The false hotel.          Enter One in the character of a false hotel. He speaks:                   MALEMUTE!                   BEZOAR!                   TREMENDULATE!                   FACTION.                   CUCURBITE.                   Pantages. TRASHMULE.              finger A man in a black suit stands at the entrance to the tomb Of the Emperor Enyu, catty-corner from my front door He bellows like a bull at irregular intervals A man steps out the front door of his house He says (in French), “Again, the same thing.” Radio gives me German actors performing Faust I’m reminded of Hudibras The triumph of commercial middle class Chanted in paltry quatrains. Toujours la même chose. A little chocolate tomb for a dead maraschino cherry Coffeeshop sugarbowl another compromise Picture of childish French sailor “English” inscription (sans-serif letters)                   “anchortheway” A lisping matelot? Encore, the way? “Encore, vos nerfs.” Leaps & bounds Ponderous numbers to confine Limit the flower                 A measured compromise “I didn’t get her cherry but I got the box it came in.” The flower goes beyond the edge of its petals The poem runs past the edge of the paper Teeth I don’t have anymore hurt me today Today I started late and quit early And accomplished everything, but the next day was Marred by fits of rage, mental confusion Lapses of memory. Olson dead in New York Jack dead in Florida. Today I am going to take more: Smoked some and ate some          OM.         AH.         HUM.                       in five sacred colors I woke up a couple of times during the night High with lights and music behind the eyes This morning I am cured and know who and where I’m at Why should I go to Europe to look at Several million nervous white folks My very own relatives there they are Totally uncivilized, fingering and puzzling over The ruins of Western Civilization I feel closer to that culture which our ancestors Destroyed . . . megalithic builders initiated in mushroom Mysteries at Crete, Eleusis, New Grange In this capital we also fumble with ruins of high culture But feelings of antique propriety keep heavy sway Over family, marriage, feudal obligations to a chief The life of the Capital goes by in tight pants Or on horseback brilliant silk hakama Brocade karaginu gleaming lacquer hat Summer’s dead leaves philaudering into dusty moss Like melting Dracula.                 (PHILAUDERING. Mot imaginaire de l’auteur.) The soul extractors are here. Edgar W. Tomczyk of Lima, Ohio, will now attempt To drive a 35-ton Caterpillar tractor through Two inches of boiling water from which he will escape Absolutely unharmed!                 (oops.) Rupert Scanlon of Great Falls, Montana will now . . . The world (and I) Barge past the sun Glass on stove’s fuel-gauge reflects The sun onto north wall twenty feet away The passage of Time, the zooming of the earth Can be witnessed as a disc of light Sliding over dots of mud plaster sand Other goop embedded in the surface Daitokuji celebration day still echoes in my head Sound of manhole-cover falling flat on stone floor The rainy maples at Koto-In Last night wild boar for supper Shakuhachi music over snowy torrent BOTAN NABE, Peony Cassoulet So far north of the Capital the road is only paved When it becomes (five seconds) mountain village mainstreet Among sugi trees ordinary dirt in the canyons But the people speak Kyoto-ben BOTAN garden of Daitokuji monastery Manhole-cover clang crash Big pair of cymbals, thin brass with center bowl Broad-rim soup dishes B L A S H! Everybody dolled up in brocade bib and tucker Chinese canal-boat shoes, Nootka shaman hats To exceed wisdom and ignorance escape skull chain (Juzu beads I saw today each bead a white head-bone Apparently impossible although there’s enough space Between bone crystals to drive a truck through) There’s not an owl in the world who thinks or knows   “I am an owl.” Not one who knows there’s a man called Slotkin who knows more about owls and the owl trade Than any owl. I wonder though, Can Professor-Doktor Slotkin eat mice and fly. Kyoto 6 P.M. News: Somebody left a pistol in a raincoat in a taxi on Higashiyama (Eastern Mountain) Road New York Buddha Law: All sentient beings will be brought   To complete final perfect enlightenment If you will write a letter to The New York Times Condemning Ignorance, Desire and Attachment. Almost all Americans aged 4 to 100 Have the spiritual natures of Chicago policemen. Scratch an American and find a cop. There is no Generation gap. I sit in the north room Look out across the floor into the garden 12 1/2 tatami mats the pleasure of contemplating them They are beautiful and they aren’t mine. Present appearance of quiet neutral emptiness Books, music, pictures, letters, jewels, machines Buddha statues and other junk all hidden away As if inside my head (think of the closets As memory banks) Wooden ceilings pale orange Floors the color of wheat straw, light-grey paper Colored mountains near the bottom cover the fusuma That divide rooms hide closets. Glass and white paper Shoji screens two garden ends of the house north and south Heavy floral designs of Michoacan (Have you ever considered going THERE to live) O flowers more lovely than wine Adonis and/or Dionysus . . . “. . .only one note and it a flat one . . .” “Only a rose For you.” (That was a long time ago.)                         (unique abyss)                         “I’ll go along                         With a smile & a song                         For anyone . . .” all this was Copyrighted maybe 1911 “ONLY A ROSE FOR YOU!” So long ago I was a prisoner still and other people Made everything happen good bad & indifferent                       “Control yourself!” they said To survive continuous neural bombardment Meningeal bubbles twenty years after— Now I make things happen These thin brass domes and birds of ice Cheap fruit cries pop There’s your tricycle (from Jimmy Broughton’s movie, Mother's Day)                               Tricycle from the Isle of Man Three legs running “The Shinto emblem showing three comma-shaped figures in a whirl symbolizes the triad of the dynamic movements of musubi. . .”—Jean Herbert Athenian abyss       Tarquin Old Stairs       off the steep edge of town       Delphi something else                       a friend writes from Eleusis: “nothing here                       but a vacant lot . . .factories in the distance”                       “Those caves of ice”                                   ,                         (large comma) “JA!” Mr. C. Olson used to say so the word Had a big walrus mustache laden with fresh beer foam Flowers have great medicinal virtue I decide not to go to town until Wednesday Buy Time to read at Asahi Beer Hall, not have to teach I just now caught bright future glimpse Of myself on Wednesday: Long green coat Orange beard glasses completely distracted By trauma of trying to talk Japanese to the waitress Out of patience out of breath wrestling to break   Strong wool British overcoat stranglehold Flowers and vegetables                                     maybe they will change my mind The light is different because it’s a different season                                (Audumb in New York) usual garden uniform green moss a pleasure. In spring unexpected crocus and lily and tulip Crash through it—surprising shapes and colors Western Civilization rigid and tyrannical But it also teaches necessity for objective examination Of the organization and also provides all kinds of suggestions How to alter the works. Mr. Karl Marx wrote a book All by his lonesome in the British Museum. (Shhh!) I’ve read the trial and death of Socrates Lots of times. When it hits me right I can cry Other days I wonder why it took the Government so long To catch up with him. Nothing happened To Plato, there he sits, writing. Homer and The Classics burnt at Appomottox Confucius enjoyed a vogue as originator of jokey sayings, 1939 30:IV, 7:55 A.M. Unknown quantity and quality LSD 7:21 P.M. head full of million-watt light Hangs from the ceiling, old China dome Newly uncovered. Dirty but thin, hard and shiny. Far-away midge on quiet tatami. Many amperes and micro-watts weeded the garden Picked it up by one end and shook it Like the dog’s dirty blanket, flooch! flooch! And resettled it softly down over the shrubs and bugs Lots of discoveries underneath All miraculous and alive The Capital more than usually full of foreigners— Expo ’70, Osaka. Americans at first imagine   Japan is extension of Cincinnati suburbs Amazed and outraged to find everything here In careful and complete control of people who don’t Speak English, occupied (somewhat aggressively) with Being very Japanese. That is the funny man’s house over there. That’s where the funny man lives. Keep away. Hair.       Hair.       Hair.       Hair.       Hair. THE JOURNAL OF JOHN GABRIEL STEDMAN 1744-1797,                   “June 9 (1795) . . .the Apollo gardens, Marylebone, Madagascar bat as big as a duck . . . June 24 . . . How dreadful London; where a Mr. B—declared Openly his lust for infants, his thirst for regicide, and believes in no God whatever. . . . August . . .Met 300 whores in the Strand . . .Saw a   mermaid (. . . September . . .) All knaves and fools and cruel to the excess. Blake was mobb’d and robb’d.” A friend wrote from Kent, Ohio, last year        “The Midwest is full of people who want to write poetry        and want to listen to it.” This year the National Guard, weeping with pity and fright Kill four students, firing “into the mob” Nobody cared. Nobody remembers the Korean “Police Action” Nobody will remember our “Advisory Mission” to Indo-China                            why are they doing it Why are they                oh, never mind am I supposed to judge them Don’t you remember being high and weeding the garden And whatever is really beautiful can’t be destroyed We can’t get our hands on it,                                              “. . .The truly great Have all one age, & from one visible space Shed influence! They, both in power and act, Are permanent, and Time is not with them, Save as it worketh for them, they in it.”                   -S.T. Colerdige, “To William Wordsworth” Endless weedy babble comes away easily The flowers feel different, having been intentionally Placed by living fingers which I also feel Just think of it as a large allegorical painting Nude figures, red velvet drapery, white marble “Classical Architecture” (Parthenon Bank of Chemical Pantheon   Library)                            America Devouring Her Own Young (The soldiers are also our children, we’ve lied to them, too Americanism, Baseball, Commerce, Democracy, Education,   Fanaticism Gold, Home Economics,                                ignorance The complete college curriculum Then put them into uniform and turn them loose with guns To kill “hate-filled long-hair dirty dope-fiend Com/Symp”) Nobody cares because nothing really happened It was on the TV, everybody will get up Wash off the catsup, collect union wages & go home Nobody cares, nobody thinks anything about it No thought at all; a succession of needs and little raunchy Schemes. They should have killed a few hundred more— All a Communist plot to move Blacks into suburbs Turn over the country to freeloaders, dope-fiend hippy queers” The American Revolution was a tax-dodge Dreamed up by some smart Harvard men Who got some good out of it. A few of their high-society friends also scored Russian Revolution a strictly ugly downtown proposition The Great Unwashed on a rampage. No reference to mystical   Rights to Life & pursuable happiness guaranteed by Eighteenth Century rationalist Deity in curly wig Old man potters down the lane singing Stops to search the roadside flowers and weeds For some particular leaf that he puts in plastic bag Of greens. Last night’s old man, KONDO Kenzo (80-some odd years) performed the No of Motomezuka Acting a young girl and her ghost frying in hell We all kept waiting for him to stumble, collapse Fall off the stage disintegrate But the longer we watched the clearer it became: The stage, the entire theater might collapse much sooner Fall to sand and rust and splintered beams Mr Kondo would still be there singing and dancing Every fold of his costume in place five hundred years It pleases folks in Washington D.C. to imagine The Russian Revolution is going to flop any minute now (After fifty years) the insurgent Bolsheviki will be put down The dear Tsar restored as modern constitutional monarch (We did it in Tokyo, didn’t we?) and the Patriarch of The Church will crown him in St. Basil’s while the Don Cossack Choir (beards and gold brocades) chant Slavonic Liturgies in full color satellite TV an example To the benighted everywhere, if only we will pay Just a little bit more and hire a few more FBI men A few inches of adhesive tape seals the mouth But it is hard to get rid of the idea of liberty After forty years of war Asia still exists, Not to mention the Viet Cong And quite different from the plans of Washington Or Moscow or the Vatican. (Napoleon said, “China . . . sleeping giant. I shudder to think what happen When he wake . . .”) Adhesive tape in Federal Court Nothing wrong with the System You’ll get a chance to talk later Federal Court held together with gum Arabic And Chicago cops Nara has a great magical feeling The city no longer exists, the first capital Restored fragments of temples, carefully excavated Site of Imperial Palace in the rice fields Like Olson I’ve been writing about the wrong town?                   “Worcester! I’m from Worcester!                   All this about Gloucester . . .                   I’ve been writing about the wrong town                   all this time!” (Vancouver, 1963) Kent State, Jackson State, There was no reason to kill them Fusillade into an unarmed crowd Of children. I can’t forgive us for feeding them To the Bears currently raiding Wall Street Painless Extraction time again Squeezing water out of the stocks Blood out of the suckers Everybody hopes to catch a nice gob of the goo But there’s never quite enough Didn’t you hear about the reservations? We were supposed To phone ahead for reservations. In advance. Never quite enough, the Official Party had To be served first. Never quite enough Because it was planned that way. My grandmother used to say, “And so he was left S.O.L.” I asked her, “What’s that mean?” “Certainly out of luck.” Those that’s got, gets. Them that ain’t is S.O.L.                            “Oh, the coat and the pants                            Do all of the work                            But the vest gets all the gravy!” We complain of Tiberius in the White House But consider: Caligula Waits fretfully in some provincial capital CAPITAL REMOVED TO FUKUHARA (Kamo no Chomei reporting) 6th month, 1180—        “To north the land rose up high along a ridge of hills and   to the south sloped down to the sea. The roar of the waves made   a constant din and the salt winds were of a terrible severity.   The palace was in the mountains, and, suggesting as it did the   log construction of the ancient palaces, was not without its    charms. . . . The manners of the capital had suddenly changed    and were now exactly like those of rustic soldiers.” Oregon City by the papermill falls of Willamette There’s Dr. John McLoughlin’s big white house Retired magnificence of Hudson Bay Co. Benefactor of our Pioneer Ancestors John Jacob Astor ran him out of business Washington Irving described all but the money Where was the capital: Champoeg, Oregon City, Portland, Salem. The money is in Portland the university in Eugene The capital in Salem: Life Along the Willamette River?                 now a stink-hole Paper-puke sulphur trioxide and mercury The lesser towns contribute only garbage and human excrement The Capitol’s great brass dome warping Melting in the flames Hand-carved oak and myrtle and walnut paneling State House in the park, toy stage set, blazing A lost art, my father used to say. Nobody knows How to do that nay more. Palaces by Vanbrugh, mansions and Watergates of Inigo Jones Gardens by Capability Brown                 blazing “Sept. 2, a lamentable fire. . . .the wind being eastward blew   clouds of smoke over Oxon the next day . . .the moon was   darkened by clouds of smoak and looked reddish. The fire or   flame made a noise like the waves of the sea.” So says Anthony à Wood.   Yet there are still remaining Shosoin, parts of the Horyuji, Yakushiji, Toshodaiji The capital disappeared around them. Byodoin and Muroji Parts of Daigoji too far away from the battlefields And from carelessness, perhaps. These can still be seen, In spite of earthquake, ambition, silliness The thousand Buddhas at Sanjusangendo, the others at The Toji, survived though the city was flattened   Eight or ten times in a row Jack used to say “Some day you and Gary and Allen and me Will all be old bums under a bridge, Down by the railroad tracks. We’ll say, Remember when we was all out there in Californy, Years ago?” Gentle rain from grey-black lump clouds Fine pale blue sky Three-color cat sits on weedpile Near but not under the largest ranch of Mt Koya pine All I can say this morning is a dance Which can’t be recorded here A wish to be free from orders, notions, whims Mine or other people’s Waiting for the laundry delivery man Waiting for 95 liters of kerosene Chrysanthemum yellow starfish tube- Foot petals Ancient Orient! Shortest route to the forebrain Through olfactory lobes. Longest way round is The shortest way home. A little trip Through the Anima Mundi, now show Now currently appearing a persistent vision When it happens at the correct speed But if you get too close it is only Patterns of light Drop candy and try to follow it Creates new place and time. Looking up I see blank staring faces Reflecting steady silver glow. Silence. Under the bright umbrella, University of British Columbia Beer on the terrace of the Faculty Club Allen & Bob Straightening out something complicated, Olson sighing the while, “I hear you. One, four, three. I hear you. One, four, three. Minot’s Ledge Light. One, four, three. I LOVE YOU. One, four, three, Minot’s Ledge Light. You remember, don’t you Bob. One, four, three I LOVE YOU—what better way to remember?” Do intelligent questions get interesting answers. All I know is Every time I get mixed up with rich folks It costs me all the money I have in my pocket                         CURIOUS ELISION                         LORD, HAVE MERCY UPON US Michaelangelo/Cole Porter Variations DAY & NIGHT: DAY & NIGHT, waking and sleeping That’s what that’s all about A man with titties like a woman A woman with muscles like a man             “To Europe?”             . . . . . . . .             “I must have adorned it with a strange             grimace, but my inspiration had been right.             To Europe . . .”                             -Henry James Pierre who?                 “coming & going”                          “well if you’d got drunk and                            climbed up to the top of the door                          and took off all your clothes                          and passed out cold                          how would       Y O U       look?” No matter how far we travel We find most of the world living as quasi-civilized Nomads among polished marble ruins of great cultures The quality of life and the meaning of these remains Are quite imperfectly known to us, no matter how skillfully We parse the verbs of lost languages All ignorantly we project our own savagery & cannibalism Upon societies and individuals who were   Our civilized ancestors Christ now returns under the name U.S.A. Rages wild across the earth to avenge himself Napalm and nuclear bombs for every insult Every prick of thorn crown “Not peace but a sword”         (Curious elision.) Lays about him burning and smashing Murdering the Sea,          The war continues because it is profitable.          It’s making good money for those who had          Money to invest in it from the beginning Curious elision for all who did not. All of   a sudden it became as if nothing had happened   And that was the end. Babies we creep out of water sack Hid there by young men Old we slide into firebox Drift up the flue to heaven A natural history. A narrow escape What happened. Walked to local coffeeshop Tomato juice. Start home via Ninnaji templegrounds People chanting in front of magic Fudo spring I went to look at the Mie-do, then realized   I was sick or at least beleaguered by creep vibrations Clearly time for magical cure. I poured water over Fudo his rocky image Chanted his mantra and bowed. I also rubbed Magic water on my head. Old lady caretaker Delighted;       she said I had done well and wished For my rapid recovery. To enforce the cure I visited Fudo spring at Kiyomizudera, the Kwannon and other Buddhas there Expensive tempura lunch with view of Chion In The Eastern Mountains and a glimpse of Momoyama Castle Glimpse has a marvelous sound like limpkin and Temko “That Fudo a good old boy he from Texas!” Shinshindo Coffee house brick fountain Stone, tree, new leaves, now a new electrical   Garden lamp on metal pole, as in Mrs Blah’s patio/barbecue   “area” Chagrin Falls, Ohio. The latest incarnation of The Frog Child tries to ride minute red tricycle That groans and squeals. Delicious croissants. I can still feel happy here. How come. I’m too fond of eggplant ever to be allowed into Heaven But imagine celestial brinjal— aubergines du paradis! ANACHRONISM:          a) homesick for one of              the chief cities of Ohio          b) process for correcting chromatic              aberration in camera and other lenses One of the most wonderful and magical actions We can perform:         Let something alone. Refuse To allow yourself the pleasure of messing it up. The things appear to want adjusting, improving, Cleaning up &c. APPEARS so to us But as a collection of “event particles” A section of the Universe as a noisy morning &c Leave it alone. Don’t tamper with it. Free of that poor-ass Oregon down-home history As this clear water streaming over head eyes face I can see hollyhocks ten feet high sideways To go and to stay illusory I flee pale music                         (I know what I’m doing, NIGHT & DAY) I flee Death’s pale music                                   (Well, what?) Fleeing Death’s proud music, “Get up out of there,” my father used to say, “You can’t sleep your life away. People die in bed.” But I am tired of all the world With notebook and pen I hurl myself deep among The dopey sheets to bed, and lock the gates! Shopping among the sand at the bottom of a birdcage Every grain a universe designed by Walter Lantz Nonskid never-fail plastic whose colors fade All surfaces dim and grubby all of them scraped Minutely scored cracked and flawed Material impervious to most chemicals Resistant to ordinary wear Allegorical painting: CUPIDITY DECEIV’D BY ADVERTISING The canary in residence is terribly   Intelligent and infested with mites. “Rooty-toot-toot” was the sound of the little .44 Frankie wasted her faithless lover Whenever I asked people what all that meant They said “Never mind” – “Row the boat, Norman, row!” Hot weather erodes my powers At the Ishiyamadera, small room with bo-leaf window (For the viewing of the moon, the priest explains.) She looks at the moon through that window that you see Over there. She is now a wax dummy with a face That exhibits what the Japanese think of as “refined” Features. All dressed up in Heian court robes Long black hair down her back. In the antechamber A smaller dummy represents girl-child attendant Grinding ink at a large inkstone The figure of Murasaki holds a writing brush And a long piece of paper. Her head has begun to turn Away from the writing to observe the moon And quite likely to remark upon the song of the uguisu Scholars, Japanese and Western, say she never did Never was here a minute. The priest shows A sutra copied out in Murasaki's own handwriting Here's the very inkstone that she used. There is the moonlight window Dog days, ten years, I try to remember your face You disappear, all my head can see Are two paintings and drawings in red ink Whatever else I've done with my life Amounts to nothing But inside the lantern a white speckled black beetle Not quite as large as a rice-bird gives Complete performance of Siegfried all alone I am a hunting and gathering culture The Moselle wine-boat sails over icy Delaware On gossamer wing through the woods to Skye (Hurrah for Miss Flora MacDonald) Under the shadow of those trees Edge of typhoon sudden rain Shelter at Basho's Rakushisha hut Green persimmons next door to Princess Uchiko her tomb (Famous for her Chinese poems, first priestess of Kamo Shrine) Under the shadow of those trees, waiting for the boat Cythère POÈME IMMENSE ET DRÔLETIQUE    Night morning Greyhound bus NEVADA have a new driver    all on different schedules                               "quel sentiment. quelle                                   delicatesse***
The glories of our blood and state Are shadows, not substantial things; There is no armor against fate; Death lays his icy hand on kings.     Scepter and crown     Must tumble down And in the dust be equal made With the poor crooked scythe and spade. Some men with swords may reap the field And plant fresh laurels where they kill, But their strong nerves at last must yield; They tame but one another still.     Early or late     They stoop to fate And must give up their murmuring breath, When they, pale captives, creep to death. The garlands wither on your brow, Then boast no more your mighty deeds; Upon death’s purple altar now See where the victor-victim bleeds.     Your heads must come     To the cold tomb; Only the actions of the just Smell sweet and blossom in their dust.
***
Harry, whose tuneful and well-measured song       First taught our English music how to span       Words with just note and accent, not to scan       With Midas’ ears, committing short and long, Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng,       With praise enough for Envy to look wan;       To after-age thou shalt be writ the man       That with smooth air couldst humor best our tongue. Thou honor’st Verse, and Verse must lend her wing       To honor thee, the priest of Phœbus’ choir,       That tun’st their happiest lines in hymn or story. Dante shall give Fame leave to set thee higher       Than his Casella, whom he wooed to sing,       Met in the milder shades of Purgatory.
***
Cyriack, whose grandsire on the royal bench       Of British Themis, with no mean applause,       Pronounced, and in his volumes taught, our laws,       Which others at their bar so often wrench, Today deep thoughts resolve with me to drench       In mirth that after no repenting draws;       Let Euclid rest, and Archimedes pause,       And what the Swede intend, and what the French. To measure life learn thou betimes, and know       Toward solid good what leads the nearest way;       For other things mild Heaven a time ordains, And disapproves that care, though wise in show,       That with superfluous burden loads the day,       And, when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains.
***
Of thee, kind boy, I ask no red and white,     To make up my delight;     No odd becoming graces, Black eyes, or little know-not-whats in faces; Make me but mad enough, give me good store Of love for her I count;     I ask no more, ’Tis love in love that makes the sport. There’s no such thing as that we beauty call,     It is mere cozenage all;     For though some, long ago, Liked certain colors mingled so and so, That doth not tie me now from choosing new; If I a fancy take     To black and blue, That fancy doth it beauty make. ’Tis not the meat, but ’tis the appetite     Makes eating a delight;     And if I like one dish More than another, that a pheasant is; What in our watches, that in us is found: So to the height and nick     We up be wound, No matter by what hand or trick.
***
I stand alone at the foot  Of my father’s grave,  Trembling to tell:  The door to the granary is open,  Sir,  And someone lost the bucket  To the well.
***
DIALOGUE        T.C.       J.S.Thom. Didst thou not find the place inspired,And flowers, as if they had desiredNo other sun, start from their beds,And for a sight steal out their heads?Heardst thou not music when she talked?And didst not find that as she walkedShe threw rare perfumes all about,Such as bean-blossoms newly out,Or chafèd spices give?—J.S. I must confess those perfumes, Tom,I did not smell; nor found that fromHer passing by ought sprung up new.The flowers had all their birth from you;For I passed o’er the self-same walkAnd did not find one single stalkOf anything that was to bringThis unknown after-after-spring.Thom. Dull and insensible, couldst seeA thing so near a deityMove up and down, and feel no change?J.S. None, and so great, were alike strange;I had my thoughts, but not your way.All are not born, sir, to the bay.Alas! Tom, I am flesh and blood,And was consulting how I couldIn spite of masks and hoods descryThe parts denied unto the eye.I was undoing all she wore,And had she walked but one turn more,Eve in her first state had not beenMore naked or more plainly seen.Thom. ’Twas well for thee she left the place;There is great danger in that face.But hadst thou viewed her leg and thigh,And upon that discoverySearched after parts that are more dear(As fancy seldom stops so near),No time or age had ever seenSo lost a thing as thou hadst been.
***
Go, smiling souls, your new-built cages break, In heaven you’ll learn to sing, ere here to speak, Nor let the milky fonts that bathe your thirst                                            Be your delay; The place that calls you hence is, at the worst,                                            Milk all the way.
***
To see both blended in one flood, The mothers’ milk, the children’s blood, Makes me doubt if heaven will gather Roses hence, or lilies rather.
***
What bright soft thing is this?     Sweet Mary, the fair eyes’ expense?     A moist spark it is,     A wat’ry diamond; from whence The very term, I think, was found The water of a diamond.     O ’tis not a tear,  ’Tis a star about to drop From thine eye its sphere;    The sun will stoop and take it up. Proud will his sister be to wear This thine eyes’ jewel in her ear.     O ’tis a tear  Too true a tear; for no sad eyne,     How sad so e’re,  Rain so true a teare as thine; Each drop leaving a place so dear, Weeps for itself, is its own tear.     Such a pearl as this is,    (Slipped from Aurora’s dewy breast) The rose bud’s sweet lip kisses;    And such the rose itself, when vexed With ungentle flames, does shed, Sweating in too warm a bed.     Such the maiden gem,    By the wanton spring put on, Peeps from her parent stem,    And blushes on the manly sun: This wat’ry blossom of thy eyne, Ripe, will make the richer wine.     Faire drop, why quak’st thou so?  ’Cause thou straight must lay thy head     In the dust? o no;    The dust shall never be thy bed: A pillow for thee will I bring, Stuffed with down of angels’ wing.     Thus carried up on high,  (For to Heaven thou must go)     Sweetly shalt thou lie  And in soft slumbers bathe thy woe; Till the singing orbs awake thee, And one of their bright chorus make thee.     There thy self shalt be  An eye, but not a weeping one,     Yet I doubt of thee,  Whether th’hadst rather there have shone An eye of Heaven; or still shine here, In th’Heaven of Mary’s eye, a tear.
***
1  Indeed I must confess,  When souls mix ’tis an happiness,But not complete till bodies too do join,And both our wholes into one whole combine;But half of heaven the souls in glory taste  Till by love in heaven at last   Their bodies too are placed.                   2  In thy immortal part  Man, as well as I, thou art.But something ’tis that differs thee and me,And we must one even in that difference be.I thee both as a man and woman prize,  For a perfect love implies  Love in all capacities.                   3  Can that for true love pass  When a fair woman courts her glass?Something unlike must in love’s likeness be:His wonder is one and variety.For he whose soul nought but a soul can move  Does a new Narcissus prove,  And his own image love.                   4  That souls do beauty know  ’Tis to the body’s help they owe;If when they know’t they straight abuse that trustAnd shut the body from’t, ’tis as unjustAs if I brought my dearest friend to see  My mistress and at th’instant he  Should steal her quite from me.
***
O thou that swing’st upon the waving hair    Of some well-fillèd oaten beard, Drunk every night with a delicious tear    Dropped thee from heaven, where now th’ art reared; The joys of earth and air are thine entire,    That with thy feet and wings dost hop and fly; And, when thy poppy works, thou dost retire    To thy carved acorn-bed to lie. Up with the day, the sun thou welcom’st then,    Sport’st in the gilt-plats of his beams, And all these merry days mak’st merry men,    Thyself, and melancholy streams. But ah, the sickle! Golden ears are cropped;    Ceres and Bacchus bid good night; Sharp, frosty fingers all your flowers have topped,    And what scythes spared, winds shave off quite. Poor verdant fool, and now green ice! thy joys,    Large and as lasting as thy perch of grass, Bid us lay in ’gainst winter rain, and poise    Their floods with an o’erflowing glass. Thou best of men and friends! we will create    A genuine summer in each other’s breast, And spite of this cold time and frozen fate,    Thaw us a warm seat to our rest. Our sacred hearths shall burn eternally,    As vestal flames; the North Wind, he Shall strike his frost-stretched wings, dissolve, and fly    This Etna in epitome. Dropping December shall come weeping in,    Bewail th’usurping of his reign: But when in showers of old Greek we begin,    Shall cry he hath his crown again! Night, as clear Hesper, shall our tapers whip    From the light casements where we play, And the dark hag from her black mantle strip,    And stick there everlasting day. Thus richer than untempted kings are we,    That, asking nothing, nothing need: Though lords of all what seas embrace, yet he    That wants himself is poor indeed.
***
Hello, hello, what to tell you was The world's invisible You see only yourself, that's not the world                 although you are of it Are you there     hello     why do you have your head in a sack?     a roony-bomb dream tank?     Why you got a banana in your ear? You where?                 Brown eyes they see blue sky                 The world imagines you                 Figure it's a planet                                               You hear?                 an obscure star in the middle Once you were pleasure-milk and egg                   Were you there Now you are eggs of milk between your legs                       Are you there “I am situated somewhere near the rim of a fairly large galaxy   which is one of a group of same & outside of which a   considerable number take their way at incredible speeds &   apparently in the opposite direction...”     You are a wish to squirt pleasantly     You want a lot of things & they are nice & you imagine     They are you and therefore you are nice     You are a wish to be here     Wishing yourself                                   elsewhere “Hello. Try to talk some sense even if you don't think any It is history                    (your mistake: “History WAS”)                                                                 now                                            * History an explanation of why I deserve what I take                                            * History an explanation of why I get what I deserve                                            *     (Through more or less clenched teeth):     “How can you sit there & look at the faces     you see in Montgomery Street wiped blank     from selling whatever brains they got faces     in 3rd Street blank from facing a lathe all day     & TV all night African tromped-on faces Asiatic     hunger faces Washington war-masks & smile at me     about how after all this is a Moral Universe     gives me the screaming jumping meemies I thought     you were bright enough had enough work-experience     yourself to have some faint idea of...”                                            * hello.     “THE WIND RATTLES THE WINDOW I CAN'T     SLEEP FRIDAY NIGHT IS VERY LARGE IN SAN     FRANCISCO THE LOWER CLASSES GET PAID ON       FRIDAY & GET ON THEIR WAY TO SPEND IT IN     UPPER-MIDDLE-CLASS CLIPJOINTS THEY CLAIM     AREN'T TOURIST TRAPS THE UPPER CLASSES ARE     LUSHED OUT OF THEIR HEADS DOWN IN PEBBLE     BEACH SUCKING EACH OTHER'S & WILL SKIP THE     SHRINKER MONDAY HE'S GAY HIMSELF THE     SILLY SON OF A BITCH AS LONG AS I'M NOT OUT     HUSTLING SAILORS ON MARKET STREET & ONLY     WHEN I'M LUSHED OUT ON MY OWN PREMISES     (FOR WHICH I PAY EXCESSIVELY HIGH TAXES)                    I DON'T CARE”    “The middle classes the middle class is mainly from out of   town (that's what I like about San Francisco everybody's either up or down) they come & look at us they go away puzzled where they remain,                outclassed...                                  (they will fight the Rooshuns &c.                      they will fight the gooks & wogs & chinks &                      japs & niggers & commies & catholics & wall                      street & any man that tries to tell them                      different...)” “The upper class don't bother me a bit except why do they let themselves be buffaloed into hiring the creepy managers they do? Faceless men to represent a legal fiction? The upper well, the...”                      “UPPER CLASSES ARE HARMLESSLY IMBE- CILE THE CLASSES PRETEND NOT TO EXIST (&   VERY NEARLY CAN'T, OUTSIDE OF JAIL) THE MIDDLE   CLASS MANAGER MERCHANT BANKER PROFESSIONAL   PROFESSIONAL THE SOLID (IT'S THE CHEESE THAT   MAKES IT BINDING) CALVINISTFREUDIAN DEMOC- RACY SWELLS                         & B L O S S O M S ! ”     TERMINAL LUES ACROSS THE SHOULDERS                        OF THE WORLD “The Roman Empire went to hell when the Romans bought them- selves a goon-squad; bankrupted themselves trying to enforce moral and sumptuary laws...”                                   History's now
***
I dreamed this mortal part of mineWas metamorphosed to a vine,Which crawling one and every wayEnthralled my dainty Lucia.Methought her long small legs and thighsI with my tendrils did surprise;Her belly, buttocks, and her waistBy my soft nervelets were embraced.About her head I writhing hung,And with rich clusters (hid amongThe leaves) her temples I behung,So that my Lucia seemed to meYoung Bacchus ravished by his tree.My curls about her neck did crawl,And arms and hands they did enthrall,So that she could not freely stir(All parts there made one prisoner).But when I crept with leaves to hideThose parts which maids keep unespied,Such fleeting pleasures there I tookThat with the fancy I awoke;And found (ah me!) this flesh of mineMore like a stock than like a vine.
***
Everyone comes back here to die as I will soon. The place feels right since it’s half dead to begin with. Even on a rare morning of rain, like this morning, with the low sky hoarding its riches except for a few mock tears, the hard ground accepts nothing. Six years ago I buried my mother’s ashes beside a young lilac that’s now taller than I, and stuck the stub of a rosebush into her dirt, where like everything else not human it thrives. The small blossoms never unfurl; whatever they know they keep to themselves until a morning rain or a night wind pares the petals down to nothing. Even the neighbor cat who shits daily on the paths and then hides deep in the jungle of the weeds refuses to purr. Whatever’s here is just here, and nowhere else, so it’s right to end up beside the woman who bore me, to shovel into the dirt whatever’s left and leave only a name for some- one who wants it. Think of it, my name, no longer a portion of me, no longer inflated or bruised, no longer stewing in a rich compost of memory or the simpler one of bone shards, dirt, kitty litter, wood ashes, the roots of the eucalyptus I planted in ’73, a tiny me taking nothing, giving nothing, and free at last.
***
In prison without being accused or reach your family or have a family            You have conscience heart trouble asthma manic-depressive (we lost the baby) no meds no one no window black water nail-scratched walls your pure face turned away embarrassed you who the earth was for.
***
On nights like this we used to swim in the quarry,  the boys making up games requiring them to tear off  the girls’ clothes  and the girls cooperating, because they had new bodies since last summer and they wanted to exhibit them, the brave ones  leaping off  the high rocks — bodies crowding the water. The nights were humid, still. The stone was cool and wet, marble for  graveyards, for buildings that we never saw,  buildings in cities far away. On cloudy nights, you were blind. Those nights the rocks were dangerous,  but in another way it was all dangerous, that was what we were after.  The summer started. Then the boys and girls began to pair off  but always there were a few left at the end — sometimes they’d keep watch, sometimes they’d pretend to go off  with each other like the rest, but what could they do there, in the woods? No one wanted to be them.  But they’d show up anyway, as though some night their luck would change,  fate would be a different fate. At the beginning and at the end, though, we were all together. After the evening chores, after the smaller children were in bed,  then we were free. Nobody said anything, but we knew the nights we’d meet  and the nights we wouldn’t. Once or twice, at the end of summer,  we could see a baby was going to come out of all that kissing. And for those two, it was terrible, as terrible as being alone.  The game was over. We’d sit on the rocks smoking cigarettes,  worrying about the ones who weren’t there. And then finally walk home through the fields,  because there was always work the next day.  And the next day, we were kids again, sitting on the front steps in the morning,  eating a peach.  Just that, but it seemed an honor to have a mouth.  And then going to work, which meant helping out in the fields.  One boy worked for an old lady, building shelves.  The house was very old, maybe built when the mountain was built. And then the day faded. We were dreaming, waiting for night.  Standing at the front door at twilight, watching the shadows lengthen.  And a voice in the kitchen was always complaining about the heat, wanting the heat to break. Then the heat broke, the night was clear.  And you thought of  the boy or girl you’d be meeting later.  And you thought of  walking into the woods and lying down,  practicing all those things you were learning in the water.  And though sometimes you couldn’t see the person you were with, there was no substitute for that person. The summer night glowed; in the field, fireflies were glinting. And for those who understood such things, the stars were sending messages:  You will leave the village where you were born  and in another country you’ll become very rich, very powerful, but always you will mourn something you left behind, even though  you can’t say what it was, and eventually you will return to seek it.
***
1 Child waking up in a dark room  screaming I want my duck back, I want my duck back  in a language nobody understands in the least — There is no duck. But the dog, all upholstered in white plush — the dog is right there in the crib next to him. Years and years — that’s how much time passes.  All in a dream. But the duck — no one knows what happened to that.                                   2 They’ve  just met, now  they’re sleeping near an open window. Partly to wake them, to assure them  that what they remember of  the night is correct,  now light needs to enter the room, also to show them the context in which this occurred:  socks half  hidden under a dirty mat,  quilt decorated with green leaves — the sunlight specifying  these but not other objects,  setting boundaries, sure of  itself, not arbitrary, then lingering, describing  each thing in detail,  fastidious, like a composition in English,  even a little blood on the sheets —                                   3 Afterward, they separate for the day.  Even later, at a desk, in the market,  the manager not satisfied with the figures he’s given,  the berries moldy under the topmost layer — so that one withdraws from the world even as one continues to take action in it — You get home, that’s when you notice the mold.  Too late, in other words. As though the sun blinded you for a moment.
***
The pull of guns I understand, my father taught me hand on hand how death is. Life asserts. (Best take it like a man.) I shot a dove, the common sort and mourned not life but life so short that gazed from death as if unhurt. And I had nothing to report.
***
It’s not enough to cover the rock with leaves  — as if  vernal fluidities could be enough for the stern assault of  fact. As if  a living ornament, light and subject to temporal  breezes, could be enough to overcome despair, that chunk of  something solid in the air, unmoving, as words repeated are. It’s not enough to cover despair with motion. Motion itself  is flawed, continuous motion a narrow, thin escape from what is rooted. Leaves do sway, but in truth, they’re only flapping out, ancillary, uncertain, buffeted this way and that. They remain the fact they are bound to, involuntary notions victim to the weather of  a day, gripped by what has thrust between the rocks, flexible as everything not rock is, reckless as imagining is reckless.
***
Brilliance is a carcass on a snow-white beach. Envy never sleeps. I tell my children truthfully: a long red beard is breaking from the darkness scale. He’s chasing you because you’re new. Because he’s old and sees the town in dirty tones: violet sheep and wine-dark corn. He burns the evening rainbow like a wartime bridge until it’s charred and charlatans topple out of  robin eggs and pox  your happy window by capturing the ledge and chattering like X-rays that crash into your flesh.
***
Why do roses need their thorns?  Some things are little known.  But thorns of roses  spring and seize the surface  of  fey airs  before the roses come.  I’ve seen thorns huddle in a harmony alone, hunkered down on green, wiry canes,  smoothed blades of whipping rose stalks,  and curl their polished tridents  to night’s call.  They are like stars  digging into firmament  with such desire, you don’t quite get it,  and so healthy that  they almost have to wound,  or like bodies that can’t be argued,  borrowed, tamed.  The touch of a thorn  is a wry, deep telling  of the senses not to bloom without a wish to,  without belief  in pain  to hold us true.
***
1 Four poilus in a wood austerely shitting. Death watches them, laughing, its sides splitting. Life is a cry followed by laughter. The body before, the waste after.                                   2 Could one hear in that wood the gentle click of  the shutter like the breaking of a stick or the safety catch on its climacteric                                   3 Like the four winds. Like a low fart that rips clean air in two, like urine that drips. Four squatting footsoldiers of  the Apocalypse.                                   4 Kiss them lightly, faint breeze in the small  leaves, be the mop on the brow, the sigh that relieves. Let them dump and move on into the dark plate of  the unexposed future, too little and too late.
***
Love, we were young once, and ran races over rough ground in our best shiny shoes, we kicked at stones, we fell over, pulled faces. Our knees were filthy with our secret places, with rituals and ranks, with strategy and ruse. Love, we were young once and ran races to determine the most rudimentary of  graces such as strength and speed and the ability to bruise. We kicked at stones, we fell over, pulled faces, and doing so left no permanent traces because we fought and fell only to confuse love. We were young. Once we ran races in ghettos, in camps, in the dismal spaces of  the imagination reserved for  Jews. We kicked at stones, we fell over, pulled faces at elastic braces, shoelaces, empty packing cases as if  they were the expressions we could choose. Love, we were young once, and ran races. We kicked at stones, we fell over, we pulled faces.
***
Were I to fall in love all over again, it would be with this low ceiling, with the calm  faces of  the two men going about their craft, and with her, now twisting towards them, beautiful, defiant and free. Because we forget how beauty was once itself and nothing else, how it held its stellar moment in attic and cellar. Because that is what beauty is, this compact with time and the silence of  concentration on one subversive operation, that requires courage and sacrifice and never comes without a price.
***
The visionary moment comes just as it is raining , just as bombs are falling,  just as atoms burst like a sneeze in a city park and enter the dark as if  it were the waiting ark. You open your hand and blow the dust. You pick and throw the stone. You make the round  O of  your mouth perfect as light and the tree bends and stands upright in the stolid night.
***
I have seen eternity and it is like this, a man and woman dancing in a bar in a poor street on an unswept floor. It clings and plots and is desperate, at a point between violence and abjection, between warmth and agoraphobic fear. Let me reverse this and accept the fear. Let me drop all objections to abjection, since life itself  is desperate and has to tread the unswept floor carefully, lovingly, while the bar hovers in eternity. Like this.
***
What you cannot see through those windows beyond the bare hill is the hand resting on the table, is the man lying still on the bed, is the vague gesture of  the young woman in the hallway as she remembers something that happened yesterday, is the mouse hesitating under the draining board, is the twelve year old boy putting on a record of  Wiener Blut that he once saw his parents waltzing to. All that you see is the all-but-naked child on the all-but-naked hill against a naked sky, as if  what you could not see were the question and she the reply.
***
There’s a woman kissing a cowboy across the street.  His eight-year-old son watches from the bus stop bench. She’s really planting one on him, his Stetson in danger. It must have been some weekend. Seeing no room in that embrace for himself, the boy measures his future, legs straight out in front of him. Both hands hold onto a suitcase handle, thin arms ready to prove themselves.
***
& sea swell, hiss of   incomprehensible flat: distance: blue long-fingered ocean and its                                                                                                   nothing else: nothing in the above visible except                                                                                                   water: water and  always the white self-destroying bloom of   wavebreak &, upclose                                                                                                   roil, &                                                                                                   here, on what’s left of   land,    ticking of   stays against empty flagpoles, low tide, free day, nothing                                                                                                   being                                                                                                   memorialized here today — memories float, yes,  over the place but not memories any of   us now among the living                                                                                                   possess — open your  hands — let go the scrap metal with the laughter — let go the                                                                                                   upstairs neighbor you did not                                                                                                   protect — they took him                                                                                                   away — let go how frightened you knew he was all  along while you went on with your                                                                                                   day — your day overflowing with time and  place — they came and got him — there are manners for every kind of                                                                                                   event — he stopped reading and looked up                                                                                                   when they came in — didn’t anyone tell you  you would never feel at home — that there is a form of   slavery in everything — and when was it                                                                                                   in   your admittedly short                                                                                                   life you  were permitted to believe that this lasted                                                                                                   forever — remove   your   hands  from your pockets — take out that laundry list, that receipt for                                                                                                   everything you                                                                                                   pawned last night — decide whom to blame —                                                                                                   stick to your  story — exclude expectation of   heavenly                                                                                                   reward — exclude                                                                                                   the milk of  human kindness — poisoned from the start — yes — who ever expected that  to be the mistake — with all the murderers and miracle workers — with the hovering                                                                                                   spidery                                                                                                   fairy tales — kites, angels, missiles, evening  papers, yellow stars — clouds — those were houses that are his eyes — those were lives that                                                                                                   are his  eyes — those are families, those are privacies, those are details — those are reparation                                                                                                   agreements, summary                                                                                                   judgments, those are multiplications  on the face of   the earth that are — those are the forests, the coal seams, the                                                                                                   carbon sinks that are his —                                                                                                   as they turn into carbon sources — his — and the festering wounds that are — and the granary that burned — and the quick blow                                                                                                   administered to make it                                                                                                   painless, so-                                                                                                   called — his eyes his   yes   his blows his seed’s first                                                                                                   insertion into this our only soil —                                                                                                   &   the flower, the cut                                                                                                   flower in my                                                                                                   bouquet here,  made from the walk we took this morning, aimless, as if   free,                                                                                                   where you asked me to                                                                                                   marry you, &   the loaf   of  barley, millet and wheat I was able,                                                                                                   as a matter of course, to bring to the table, fresh-                                                                                                   baked,                                                                                                   in life.
***
What do you mean by rashes of ash? Is industry systematic work, assiduous activity, or ownership of factories? Is ripple agitate lightly? Are we tossed in tune when we write poems? And what or who emboss with gloss insignias of air? Is the Fabric about which you write in the epigraph of your poem an edifice, a symbol of heaven? Does freight refer to cargo of lading carried for pay by water, land or air? Or does it mean payment for such transportation? Or a freight train? When you say a commoded journey, do you mean a comfortable journey or a good train with well-equipped commodoties? But, then, why do you drop the ‘a’ before slumberous friend? And when you write, in “Why I Am Not a Christian” You always throw it down / But you never pick it up***
As Billy goes higher all the balloons Get marooned on the other side of the Lunar landscape. The module’s broke— It seems like for an eternity, but who’s Counting—and Sally’s joined the Moonies So we don’t see so much of her anyhow. Notorious novelty—I’d settle for a good Cup of Chase & Sand-borne—though when The strings are broken on the guitar You can always use it as a coffee table. Vienna was cold at that time of year. The sachertorte tasted sweet but the memory burned in the colon. Get a grip, get a grip, before The Grippe gets you. Glad to see the picture Of ink—the pitcher that pours before Throwing the Ball, with never a catcher in sight. Never a catcher but sometimes a catch, or A clinch or a clutch or a spoon—never a Catcher but plenty o’flack, ’till we meet On this side of the tune.
***
I saw your picture in the 79th street station. You said you’d be interested in any comments I might have on the condition of the station Mr. Fanelli, there is a lot of debris in the 79th street station that makes it unpleasant to wait in for more than a few minutes. The station could use a paint job and maybe new speakers so you could understand the delay announcements that are always being broadcast. Mr. Fanelli—there are a lot of people sleeping in the 79th street station & it makes me sad to think they have no home to go to. Mr. Fanelli, do you think you could find a more comfortable place for them to rest? It’s pretty noisy in the subway, especially all those express trains hurtling through every few minutes, anyway when the trains are in service. I have to admit, Mr. Fanelli, I think the 79th street station’s in pretty bad shape & sometimes at night as I toss in my bed I think the world’s not doing too good either, & I wonder what’s going to happen, where we’re headed, if we’re headed anywhere, if we even have heads. Mr. Fanelli, do you think if we could just start with the 79th street station & do what we could with that then maybe we could, you know, I guess, move on from there? Mr. Fanelli, when I saw your picture & the sign asking for suggestions I thought, if you really wanted to get to the bottom of what’s wrong then maybe it was my job to write to you: Maybe you’ve never been inside the 79th street station because you’re so busy managing the 72nd street & 66th street stations, maybe you don’t know the problems we have at 79th—I mean the dirt & frequent delays & the feeling of total misery that pervades the place. Mr. Fanelli, are you reading this far in the letter or do you get so many letters every day that you don’t have time to give each one the close attention it desires? Or am I the only person who’s taken up your invitation to get in touch & you just don’t have enough experience to know how to respond? I’m sorry I can’t get your attention Mr. Fanelli because I really believe if you ask for comments then you ought to be willing to act on them—even if ought is too big a word to throw around at this point. Mr. Fanelli I hope you won’t think I’m rude if I ask you a personal question. Do you get out of the office much? Do you go to the movies or do you prefer sports—or maybe quiet evenings at a local restaurant? Do you read much, Mr. Fanelli? I don’t mean just Gibbons and like that, but philosophy— have you read much Hanna Arendt or do you prefer a more ideological perspective? I think if I understood where you are coming from, Mr. Fanelli, I could write to you more cogently, more persuasively. Mr. Fanelli, do you get out of the city at all—I mean like up to Bear Mountain or out to Montauk? I mean do you notice how unpleasant the air is in the 79th street station—that we could use some cooling or air-filtering system down there? Mr. Fanelli, do you think it’s possible we could get together and talk about these things in person? There are a few other points I’d like to go over with you if I could get the chance. Things I’d like to talk to you about but that I’d be reluctant to put down on paper. Mr. Fanelli, I haven’t been feeling very good lately and I thought meeting with you face to face might change my mood, might put me into a new frame of mind. Maybe we could have lunch? Or maybe after work? Think about it, Mr. Fanelli.
***
What are aesthetic values and why do there appear to be lesser & fewer of them? Quick: define the difference between arpeggio & Armani. The baby cries because the baby likes crying. The baby cries because a pin is sticking into the baby. The baby is not crying but it is called crying. Who’s on first, what’s shortstop. The man the man declined to be, appraised at auction at eighty percent of surface volume. Cube steak on rye amusing twist on lay demo cells, absolutely no returns. Damaged goods are the only kind of goods I ever cared about.***
Directions: For each pair of sentences, circle the letter, a or b, that best expresses your viewpoint. Make a selection from each pair. Do not omit any items. 1.a) The body and the material things of the world are the key to any          knowledge we can possess.    b) Knowledge is only possible by means of the mind or psyche. 2.a) My life is largely controlled by luck and chance.    b) I can determine the basic course of my life. 3.a) Nature is indifferent to human needs.    b) Nature has some purpose, even if obscure. 4.a) I can understand the world to a sufficient extent.    b) The world is basically baffling. 5.a) Love is the greatest happiness.    b) Love is illusionary and its pleasures transient. 6.a) Political and social action can improve the state of the world.    b) Political and social action are fundamentally futile. 7.a) I cannot fully express my most private feelings.    b) I have no feelings I cannot fully express. 8.a) Virtue is its own reward.    b) Virtue is not a matter of rewards. 9.a) It is possible to tell if someone is trustworthy.    b) People turn on you in unpredictable ways. 10.a) Ideally, it would be most desirable to live in a rural area.     b) Ideally, it would be most desirable to live in an urban area. 11.a) Economic and social inequality is the greatest social evil.     b) Totalitarianism is the greatest social evil. 12.a) Overall, technology has been beneficial to human beings.     b) Overall, technology has been harmful to human beings. 13.a) Work is the potential source of the greatest human fulfillment.     b) Liberation from work should be the goal of any movement for          social improvement. 14.a) Art is at heart political in that it can change our perception of          reality.     b) Art is at heart not political because it can change only        consciousness and not events.
***
Home team suffers string of losses.—Time to change loyalties.    Quadruple bypass.—Hold the bacon on that next cheeseburger.    Poems tanking.—After stormiest days, sun comes out from behind clouds, or used to.    Marriage on rocks.—Nothing like Coke.    Election going the wrong direction.—Kick off slippers, take deep breathe, be here now.    Boss says your performance needs boost.—A long hot bath smoothes wrinkles.    War toll tops 100,000.—Get your mind off it, switch to reality TV.    Lake Tang Woo Chin Chicken with Lobster and Sweet Clam Sauce still not served and everyone else got their orders twenty minutes back.—Savor the water, feast on the company.    Subway floods and late for audition.—Start being the author of your own performance. Take a walk.    Slip on ice, break arm.—In moments like this, the preciousness of life reveals itself.    Wages down in non-union shop.—You’re a sales associate, not a worker; so proud to be part of the company.    Miss the train?—Great chance to explore the station!    Suicide bombers wrecks neighborhood.—Time to pitch in!    Nothing doing.—Take a break!    Partner in life finds another partner.—Now you can begin the journey of life anew.    Bald?—Finally, you can touch the sky with the top of your head.    Short-term recall shot.—Old memories are sweetest.    Hard drive crashes and novel not backed up.—Nothing like a fresh start.    Severe stomach cramps all morning.—Boy are these back issues of Field and Stream engrossing.    Hurricane crushes house.—You never seemed so resilient.    Brother-in-law completes second year in coma.—He seems so muchmore relaxed than he used to.    $75 ticket for Sunday meter violation on an empty street in residential neighborhood.—The city needs the money to make us safe and educate our kids.    Missed last episode of favorite murder mystery because you misprogrammed VCR.—Write your own ending!    Blue cashmere pullover has three big moth holes.—What a great looking shirt!    Son joins skinhead brigade of Jews for Jesus.—At least he’s following his bliss.    Your new play receives scathing reviews and closes after a single night.—What a glorious performance!    Pungent stench of homeless man on subway, asking for food.—Such kindness in his eyes, as I turn toward home.    Retirement savings lost on Enron and WorldCom.—They almost rhyme.    Oil spill kills seals.—The workings of the Lord are inscrutable.    Global warming swamps land masses.—Learn to accept change.    Bike going fast in wrong direction knocks you over.—A few weeks off your feet, just what the doctor ordered.    AIDS ravaging Africa.—Wasn’t Jeffrey Wright fabulous in Angels in America?    Muffler shot.—There’s this great pizza place next to the shop.    Income gap becomes crater.—Good motivation to get rich.    Abu Ghraib prisoners tortured.—Let’s face it, shit happens.    Oscar wins Emmy.—Award shows are da bomb.    FBI checking your library check-outs.—I also recommend books on Amazon.    Gay marriages annulled.—Who needs the state to sanctify our love?    President’s lies kill GIs.—He’s so decisive about his core values.    Self-Help.—Other drowns.
***
The column of the commander yielded to our first sweep.Even the water jar for our diggers we set on the south wallof the general’s tomb without knowing it. So we began.His armies retook Nubia, Libya, and the Levant,lost under the sway-bellied lantern-jawed Sun King.Overseer of all scribes, Overseer of the priests of Horus,Grain-giver to all lands, Royal chief of staff, Regent,the general had himself carried on his palanquinthrough the wailing processionsto oversee the work on this place. And so carved, thus:one of his men punches a Nubian in the face.The general was low-born; everything had countedand he knew what counted most.His platoons lift open palms towards Tutankhamun.The general towers as a sway-girdled go-between at courtfor beseeching Libyans.Only the pearl-handled revolvers do not figure here,or the comeback challenge Nuts! in the Ardennes winter forest.He had himself carried beyond the busy streets of the deadin the city of the dead sloping back from the bluffto a higher, private terrace looking across to Memphis.But then he rose to Pharaoh. So he is not here. Insteadhis first wife lay here, and then his queen also.At his own royal tomb in the Valley, where the designsremained uncarved, sketching idea along stone,he does not rest either. The fine picklock handgot past Anubis and the reared serpents, and got to him,the Lord of Upper and Lower Egypt. It got past Truthwith her high feather, which moved at the slightest disturbance.The general did deep obeisance to her. He is not here.What at last moves the heart?So much already moved, even in his own century,architects prying loose mud bricks of the core for new tombs.Cult funded in perpetuity gone in two generations.So Coleridge, who was indisposed that day, prudentlyremained in the circle of lime trees while his friends went offon their walk through the countryside. He followed them in his mind.That way no one would have to dismantle Horeheb’s outer courtto secure bricks for the statuary room, and facing stones.He cast his mind outward, a net over his dear ones,sending them at pace through the middle distance of steeples,hill lines, and the murder of Lamb’s mother by his sister,a brief madness, thus through the appropriately middle distancewhere such things are built and performed in fact, no closer, no farther,then on out to the cleansing rim of apocalypse, eveningin the bath of waning fire, one bird stitchingthe whole veil of showings tight along its upper hem—though he was not there, he could tell them that none the lesshe was next to his words and his word was with them, evenunto the rim of their wandering and their turning back.One dome of air and fire. But he was not there. Nor I here.What removes the heart from what moves it?As if I were the lecturer before a congress of doctors,his clinching point approaching, when suddenly he stared outin silence, and at last said, Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed colleagues,the only thing I can see at this moment inside my brain,such as it is, is a little white mouse chasing a little white ball.***
Steed out of my dusk and a dusk, now, for the species,veins deltawise down your silky inner thigh,veins trickling from one eye down the roan cliffsideof a nose vaulted and chanceled for winds of the Pleistocene,you have come, you paw patiently, that is the main thing,the fields between stretch wider and we, the restless, are everywheresave where your nostril quivers, arches, and you snort in the night.We who debouch into all places dream of you now nowhere.You come to a woman’s hand: that smile. You come to achild’s hand, giggling and shivers. Your hot breath pleasures soldiers.Harnessed to caisson with bannered coffin, to the baroucheat a state wedding, you are ambassador from the eldest  kingdom.The King of Brazil sent a forest of teak to pave the streetsgirdling the Pantheon, to muffle the clatter you hauled there.When we spurred you against Wellington’s infantry squares,you side-ran them or reared back. The god of catasrophes took note.Sad banner you were in the prophecies of Sweet Medicine,the whiskered whitneys bringing and spawning your manes and tailsamong the Arapaho, Cheyenne, Lakota, Kiowa,your speed between their loins a drumming into decline.Under Tutankhamun, the generalissimo who rode you hummedhis tenth title: Overseer of Works in the Hill of Gritstone,while there in those Works among the pulling men pulled alsoyour brother, sent down because of a freakish temperament.Muir knew you on both shores, and van der Post knew you,mufti lords recognizing a lord in service. Nuzzle them both.They say that Poseidon at Onchestos, breaking you as a colt,had your driver leap off where the road entered forest,and watched to see what you’d do, the rig rattling--smash itagainst the trunks on the run, or walk it through tall shadows.Where you linger for shade on the veldt, branches level,a tree is the only tree. Your water, the only water.Flickers of hair along your neck’s crest releasethe only signal. Which staggers from storm cloud to browse oats.Stubby melted candle, your recessed phallus makesno howitzer but glistens a coat whose sheen ripples off.For I imagine that Li Ho, seeing good men misusedas you were, foresaw your withdrawal from our night grasses.For your standing here re-ordains neither Akhilleusnor Cuchulain. Dew braids your mane with fresh constellations.For what shall we make of you, made into goddess, maresacrificed but receiving cult also among the footlooseon the steppes: mother ridden by god-spear, great mam thuscaptured, cinched, spurred? though your flanks shudder unfettered.Through mists we flash bits of mirror, but from themyou pound abreast, neither parent, eyes orbing the two sides.For that demigod’s eye, tiding, capsizes anyonewho would turn trainer. And this one goes on into the bond.A trainer aims at one thing, but what tingles him is forcehinting at the uncontainable, the opponent.And the top tamers, spook-soothers, the whisperers,will write their books but miss the appointment. It is not inscribed.The two  grooms beside you in Hokusai’s whitewater cascadelave you with splashes of it, currying your bulk,hoisting your nosebag--and no one has set the timer, everywhereit is one sound, stampede steadied and rocking in it.Your great-grandparents, unicorn wild assesfrom Persia and Scythia, fostered childbirth but also pissed plagues,the unharnessable summum totium browsing in ocean,an eye-spangled three-legged mountain. Hell and cloud in your seed!It was your miniature stature at the beginning, Maria Tallchiefat ten, that wedged you between giants into the straightaway.And the reindeer modeled from smudge in the Font de Gaume grottoat Les Eyzies, fading across your body, trails a third antlerlike a skater’s scarf through your head, broadening out,a dancer’s arm rippling after the total gather.Looking back from the pass at his mounted escorts, flashing themthree turns back down the corkscrew, the Fourteenth Dalai Lamasaw them slumped on your back, the red of Rahu in splashesand trickling stillness. And dripping you still awaited their nudges.In that patience, the kernel of the twister moan-liftingover Kansas, the shrapnel clatter of your take-off.Across that aftermath, bubbling through wind-sound or the mind’srise from its cringe, the flubber-flutter of moody-moodlessness.So the unforeseen from you opposes the blindly seen in us--your fuse as a spurter, jump-taker, yet a curb alsoto our unsnaffled berserkness.  For the berserking Greek saysthat only that ass’s horn or hoof, cut off and cupped upward,can hold any of the cold torrent under the world,implacable Styx, All else, graces or muons, it crumbles.And every jot which that flow dissolves, the imageswith their assessors, has rolled in us. And you have stoodcalmly beside us, your shot breath a bloom in the cold,your hooves hammers yet also the last and only chalice.The unreached-for cup, beaker for world-toxin,breast englobing ground zero. And so we know you not.And I realize: though I have walked drenched in spring rainsmy bare thighs have not hugged your warm bellows in a downpour.For though your manic tribe is mine, the boreal chargers,mere rooms, a migrant’s mangy stations, have detained me.For while historians of cultures hot on the spoor of roots amongtheir root clans have heard you drum past, they looked up only briefly.For though engravers assumed you would stay, given their way with yourmusculature, accoutrements, wavy harness, tip-toe grooms,gear draped over your cruppers like an evening gown, its ratiosand metalwork continuous with Genghis Khan’s and a jockey’s,their inky mastery frames cosily misleading questions:which posthouse this evening, what pasture tomorrow?Whereas you inquire into rupture and the unfenced: what thunderbetween flesh and ground, what surge from the cells even past sundown?
***
The feverish room and that white bed, The tumbled skirts upon a chair,   The novel flung half-open, where Hat, hair-pins, puffs, and paints are spread; The mirror that has sucked your face Into its secret deep of deeps, And there mysteriously keeps Forgotten memories of grace; And you half dressed and half awake, Your slant eyes strangely watching me, And I, who watch you drowsily, With eyes that, having slept not, ache; This (need one dread? nay, dare one hope?) Will rise, a ghost of memory, if Ever again my handkerchief Is scented with White Heliotrope.
***
1.Cross-hatchings, palm and rain,   clapboard fadedto the grain, half-shutters   open to old vines and mangrovesdraining their own shadows;   recollecting what the body knowssuspended between coral   and shifting images of cloud ...     After death,     after the knowledge     of death,his death,      his face, unwrapped,     already yellowed,     papery, recovered     with a small white cloth     then lowered away     and shut to the earth;     So pierced,     so mute,     these words     re-opening:     Not this.   2.The rain had gone. I swam against the current,harnessed by water till I turned and swungout with the tide, shouldering deepinto a rhythm of my own, long strokespulled under the body and returningpast the glinting crease in which I breathed,the sea half-woken like another bodybedded into sheer transparency,the outer reaches granular with light.Comebacks. Chains of radiance.Far more than meet the eye.What do they meet then, intimatebut otherworldly, mimicking the world?   I looked back at the land’s thin edge,pines along the shoreline near a fortwhere cannons rust, mouths left open amongthistleweed around the dozing moat.Far back among fallen needles, pigeons shufflethrough shade, their feathers iris underlight,soft flares bob the dark.                          The land had disappeared.The sun had followed it. From either wrist,half-mingled with my breath into the night,a trail of ungloved phosphor travelled back.   3.Sounds too have their surfaces:withinthe mortal frame, particles of bloodrevolve as in a sort of heaven wherebreath moves through us as an unseen light;but when the marrow bonds are parted they in turnset loose what has been called the soul ...***
Blood-drop, lung of fire setting pastthe sea bell and wave; why am I separatefrom that giant burrowing into further life?The body breathes and ridesa heavy-netted ocean swollen by the tide. Under the half-moonit’s the lighthouse light that turnsthe rest of me to early nightfall,headland, home. I send it back,a mirrored flickering across cold waters.We allow ourselves the crest that breaksabove the surface then re-forms.We make it human and we call it love.This wintering is my own and not the world’s,although the world is wintering.
***
Yield prompt compliance to the maid’s desires;A prompt compliance fans the lover’s fires:Go pleas’d where’er she goes, tho’ long the way,Tho’ the fierce Dog-star dart his sultry ray;Tho’ painted Iris gird the bluish sky,And sure portends, that rattling storms are nigh:Or, if the fair one pant for sylvan fame,Gay drag the meshes, and provoke the game:Nay, should she choose to risk the driving gale;Or steer, or row, or agile hand the sail:No toil, tho’ weak, tho’ fearful, thou forbear;No toils should tire you, and no dangers scare:Occasion smiles, then snatch an ardent kiss;The coy may struggle, but will grant the bliss:The bliss obtain’d, the fictious struggle past,Unbid, they’ll clasp you in their arms at last.
***
I need everything else Anything else     Desperately But I have nothing Shall have nothing     but this Immediate, inescapable     and invaluable No one can afford     THIS Being made here and now        (Seattle, Washington                       17 May, 1955)                       MARIGOLDS Concise (wooden)        Orange. Behind them, the garage door        Pink (Paint sold under a fatuous name: "Old Rose"        which brings a war to mind) And the mind slides over the fence again Orange against pink and green Uncontrollable! Returned of its own accord It can explain nothing Give no account What good? What worth?        Dying! You have less than a second        To live To try to explain: Say that light        in particular wave-lengths        or bundles wobbling at a given speed Produces the experience   Orange against pink Better than a sirloin steak? A screen by Korin? The effect of this, taken internally The effect                  of beauty                               on the mind There is no equivalent, least of all These objects Which ought to manifest A surface disorientation, pitting Or striae Admitting some plausible interpretation But the cost Can't be expressed in numbers dodging between        a vagrancy rap        and the newest electrical brain-curette Eating what the rich are bullied into giving Or the poor willingly share Depriving themselves More expensive than ambergris        Although the stink                  isn't as loud. (A few Wise men have said,        "Produced the same way . . .        Vomited out by sick whales.") Valuable for the same qualities        Staying-power and penetration I've squandered every crying dime.
***
Jenny kiss’d me when we met,    Jumping from the chair she sat in;Time, you thief, who love to get   Sweets into your list, put that in!Say I’m weary, say I’m sad,   Say that health and wealth have miss’d me,Say I’m growing old, but add,   Jenny kiss’d me.
***
The curtains were half drawn, the floor was swept   And strewn with rushes, rosemary and mayLay thick upon the bed on which I lay,Where through the lattice ivy-shadows crept.He leaned above me, thinking that I slept   And could not hear him; but I heard him say,   ‘Poor child, poor child’: and as he turned awayCame a deep silence, and I knew he wept.He did not touch the shroud, or raise the fold   That hid my face, or take my hand in his,      Or ruffle the smooth pillows for my head:      He did not love me living; but once dead   He pitied me; and very sweet it isTo know he still is warm though I am cold.
***
Yea, thou shalt be forgotten like spilt wine, Except these kisses of my lips on thine Brand them with immortality; but me – Men shall not see bright fire nor hear the sea, Nor mix their hearts with music, nor behold Cast forth of heaven, with feet of awful gold And plumeless wings that make the bright air blind, Lightning, with thunder for a hound behind Hunting through fields unfurrowed and unsown, But in the light and laughter, in the moan And music, and in grasp of lip and hand And shudder of water that makes felt on land The immeasurable tremor of all the sea, Memories shall mix and metaphors of me. 
***
All’s over, then: does truth sound bitter   As one at first believes?Hark, ’tis the sparrows’ good-night twitter   About your cottage eaves!And the leaf-buds on the vine are woolly,   I noticed that, today;One day more bursts them open fully   – You know the red turns grey.Tomorrow we meet the same then, dearest?   May I take your hand in mine?Mere friends are we, – well, friends the merest   Keep much that I resign:For each glance of the eye so bright and black,   Though I keep with heart’s endeavor, –Your voice, when you wish the snowdrops back,   Though it stay in my soul for ever! –Yet I will but say what mere friends say,   Or only a thought stronger;I will hold your hand but as long as all may,   Or so very little longer! 
***
I wish I could remember that first day,    First hour, first moment of your meeting me,   If bright or dim the season, it might beSummer or Winter for aught I can say;So unrecorded did it slip away,   So blind was I to see and to foresee,   So dull to mark the budding of my treeThat would not blossom yet for many a May.If only I could recollect it, such   A day of days! I let it come and go   As traceless as a thaw of bygone snow;It seemed to mean so little, meant so much;If only now I could recall that touch,   First touch of hand in hand – Did one but know!
***
I saw my Lady weep,And Sorrow proud to be advanced soIn those fair eyes, where all perfections keep;   Her face was full of woe,But such a woe (believe me) as wins more heartsThan mirth can do, with her enticing parts.Sorrow was there made fair,And Passion, wise; Tears, a delightful thing;Silence, beyond all speech, a wisdom rare;   She made her sighs to sing,And all things with so sweet a sadness move;As made my heart both grieve and love.O Fairer than aught elseThe world can shew, leave off, in time, to grieve,Enough, enough! Your joyful look excels;   Tears kill the heart, believe, O strive not to be excellent in woe,Which only breeds your beauty’s overthrow.
***
As some fond virgin, whom her mother’s careDrags from the town to wholesome country air, Just when she learns to roll a melting eye, And hear a spark, yet think no danger nigh;From the dear man unwillingly she must sever,Yet takes one kiss before she parts for ever:Thus from the world fair Zephalinda flew,Saw others happy, and with sighs withdrew;Not that their pleasures caused her discontent,She sighed not that They stayed, but that She went.   She went, to plain-work, and to purling brooks,Old-fashioned halls, dull aunts, and croaking rooks,She went from Opera, park, assembly, play,To morning walks, and prayers three hours a day;To pass her time ‘twixt reading and Bohea,To muse, and spill her solitary tea,Or o’er cold coffee trifle with the spoon,Count the slow clock, and dine exact at noon;Divert her eyes with pictures in the fire,Hum half a tune, tell stories to the squire;Up to her godly garret after seven,There starve and pray, for that’s the way to heaven.  Some Squire, perhaps, you take a delight to rack; Whose game is Whisk, whose treat a toast in sack,Who visits with a gun, presents you birds,Then gives a smacking buss, and cries – No words!Or with his hound comes hollowing from the stable,Makes love with nods, and knees beneath a table;Whose laughs are hearty, tho’ his jests are coarse,And loves you best of all things – but his horse.   In some fair evening, on your elbow laid,Your dream of triumphs in the rural shade;In pensive thought recall the fancied scene,See Coronations rise on every green;Before you pass th’ imaginary sightsOf Lords, and Earls, and Dukes, and gartered Knights;While the spread fan o’ershades your closing eyes;Then give one flirt, and all the vision flies.Thus vanish scepters, coronets, and balls,And leave you in lone woods, or empty walls.   So when your slave, at some dear, idle time,(Not plagued with headaches, or the want of rhyme)Stands in the streets, abstracted from the crew,And while he seems to study, thinks of you:Just when his fancy points your sprightly eyes,Or sees the blush of soft Parthenia rise,Gay pats my shoulder, and you vanish quite;Streets, chairs, and coxcombs rush upon my sight;Vexed to be still in town, I knit my brow,Look sour, and hum a tune – as you may now. 
***
From you have I been absent in the spring, When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim, Hath put a spirit of youth in everything, That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him. Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell Of different flowers in odour and in hue, Could make me any summer’s story tell, Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew: Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white, Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose; They were but sweet, but figures of delight Drawn after you, – you pattern of all those.     Yet seem’d it winter still, and, you away,     As with your shadow I with these did play.
***
Somewhere or other there must surely be   The face not seen, the voice not heard,The heart that not yet—never yet—ah me!   Made answer to my word.Somewhere or other, may be near or far;   Past land and sea, clean out of sight;Beyond the wandering moon, beyond the star   That tracks her night by night.Somewhere or other, may be far or near;   With just a wall, a hedge, between;With just the last leaves of the dying year   Fallen on a turf grown green.
***
’Tis now since I began to die   Four months, yet still I gasping live;Wrapp’d up in sorrow do I lie,   Hoping, yet doubting a reprieve.Adam from Paradise expell’dJust such a wretched being held.’Tis not thy love I fear to lose,   That will in spite of absence hold;But ’tis the benefit and use   Is lost, as in imprison’d gold:Which though the sum be ne’er so great,Enriches nothing but conceit.What angry star then governs me   That I must feel a double smart,Prisoner to fate as well as thee;   Kept from thy face, link’d to thy heart?Because my love all love excels,Must my grief have no parallels?Sapless and dead as Winter here   I now remain, and all I seeCopies of my wild state appear,   But I am their epitome.Love me no more, for I am grownToo dead and dull for thee to own. 
***
As Love and I, late harbour’d in one inn, With proverbs thus each other entertain: In love there is no lack, thus I begin, Fair words make fools, replieth he again; Who spares to speak, doth spare to speed (quoth I), As well (saith he) too forward, as too slow; Fortune assists the boldest, I reply, A hasty man (quoth he) ne’er wanted woe; Labour is light, where love (quoth I) doth pay, (Saith he) light burthen’s heavy, if far born; (Quoth I) the main lost, cast the bye away; You have spun a fair thread, he replies in scorn.     And having thus awhile each other thwarted,     Fools as we met, so fools again we parted.
***
I loved you first: but afterwards your love   Outsoaring mine, sang such a loftier songAs drowned the friendly cooings of my dove.   Which owes the other most? my love was long,   And yours one moment seemed to wax more strong;I loved and guessed at you, you construed meAnd loved me for what might or might not be –   Nay, weights and measures do us both a wrong.For verily love knows not ‘mine’ or ‘thine;’   With separate ‘I’ and ‘thou’ free love has done,      For one is both and both are one in love:Rich love knows nought of ‘thine that is not mine;’      Both have the strength and both the length thereof,Both of us, of the love which makes us one.
***
Many in aftertimes will say of you   ‘He loved her’ – while of me what will they say?   Not that I loved you more than just in play,For fashion’s sake as idle women do.Even let them prate; who know not what we knew   Of love and parting in exceeding pain.   Of parting hopeless here to meet again,Hopeless on earth, and heaven is out of view.But by my heart of love laid bare to you.   My love that you can make not void nor vain,Love that foregoes you but to claim anew   Beyond this passage of the gate of death,I charge you at the Judgment make it plain   My love of you was life and not a breath.
***
When I heard at the close of the day how my name had been receiv’d with plaudits in the capitol, still it was not a happy night for me that follow’d,And else when I carous’d, or when my plans were accomplish’d, still I was not happy,But the day when I rose at dawn from the bed of perfect health, refresh’d, singing, inhaling the ripe breath of autumn,When I saw the full moon in the west grow pale and disappear in the morning light,When I wander’d alone over the beach, and undressing bathed, laughing with the cool waters, and saw the sun rise,And when I thought how my dear friend my lover was on his way coming, O then I was happy,O then each breath tasted sweeter, and all that day my food nourish’d me more, and the beautiful day pass’d well,And the next came with equal joy, and with the next at evening came my friend,And that night while all was still I heard the waters roll slowly continually up the shores,I heard the hissing rustle of the liquid and sands as directed to me whispering to congratulate me, For the one I love most lay sleeping by me under the same cover in the cool night,In the stillness in the autumn moonbeams his face was inclined toward me,And his arm lay lightly around my breast – and that night I was happy.
***
Lying asleep between the strokes of night     I saw my love lean over my sad bed,     Pale as the duskiest lily’s leaf or head, Smooth-skinned and dark, with bare throat made to bite, Too wan for blushing and too warm for white,     But perfect-coloured without white or red.     And her lips opened amorously, and said – I wist not what, saving one word – Delight. And all her face was honey to my mouth,     And all her body pasture to mine eyes;          The long lithe arms and hotter hands than fire, The quivering flanks, hair smelling of the south,     The bright light feet, the splendid supple thighs          And glittering eyelids of my soul’s desire.  
***
Doing, a filthy pleasure is, and short;And done, we straight repent us of the sport:Let us not then rush blindly on unto it,Like lustful beasts, that only know to do it:For lust will languish, and that heat decay.But thus, thus, keeping endless holiday,Let us together closely lie and kiss,There is no labour, nor no shame in this;This hath pleased, doth please, and long will please; neverCan this decay, but is beginning ever.
***
When thou must home to shades of underground,And there arrived, a new admirèd guest,The beauteous spirits do engirt thee round,White Iope, blithe Helen, and the rest,To hear the stories of thy finished loveFrom that smooth tongue whose music hell can move;Then wilt thou speak of banqueting delights,Of masques and revels which sweet youth did make,Of tourneys and great challenges of knights,And all these triumphs for thy beauty’s sake:When thou hast told these honours done to thee,Then tell, O tell, how thou didst murder me!
***
With how sad steps, O moon, thou climb’st the skies! How silently, and with how wan a face! What! may it be that even in heavenly place That busy archer his sharp arrows tries? Sure, if that long-with-love-acquainted eyes Can judge of love, thou feel’st a lover’s case: I read it in thy looks; thy languished grace To me, that feel the like, thy state descries. Then, even of fellowship, O Moon, tell me, Is constant love deemed there but want of wit? Are beauties there as proud as here they be? Do they above love to be loved, and yet     Those lovers scorn whom that love doth possess?     Do they call ‘virtue’ there—ungratefulness?
***
I A Tower of Brass, one would have said, And Locks, and Bolts, and Iron Bars,   Might have preserv’d one innocent Maiden-head. The jealous Father thought he well might spare All further jealous Care. And, as he walk’d, t’himself alone he smiled, To think how Venus’ Arts he had beguil’d;          And when he slept, his Rest was deep:          But Venus laugh’d, to see and hear him sleep:                   She taught the am’rous Jove                   A magical Receipt in Love, Which arm’d him stronger, and which help’d him more, Than all his Thunder did, and his Almightyship before. II She taught him Love’s Elixir, by which Art His Godhead into Gold he did convert;          No Guards did then his Passage stay,            He pass’d with Ease, Gold was the Word; Subtle as Light’ning, bright, and quick, and fierce, Gold thro’ Doors and Walls did pierce; And as that works sometimes upon the Sword,          Melted the Maidenhead away,          Ev’n in the secret Scabbard where it lay.          The prudent Macedonian King,          To blow up Towns a Golden Mine did spring;          He broke thro’ Gates with this Petarr,          ’Tis the great Art of Peace, the Engine ’tis of War; And Fleets and Armies follow it afar; The Ensign ’tis at Land: and ’tis the Seaman’s Star. 
***
In summer’s heat and mid-time of the dayTo rest my limbs upon a bed I lay,One window shut, the other open stood,Which gave such light as twinkles in a wood,Like twilight glimpse at setting of the sunOr night being past, and yet not day begun.Such light to shamefaced maidens must be shown,Where they may sport, and seem to be unknown.Then came Corinna in a long loose gown,Her white neck hid with tresses hanging down:Resembling fair Semiramis going to bedOr Laïs of a thousand wooers sped.I snatched her gown, being thin, the harm was small,Yet strived she to be covered therewithal.And striving thus as one that would be cast,Betrayed herself, and yielded at the last.Stark naked as she stood before mine eye,Not one wen in her body could I spy.What arms and shoulders did I touch and see,How apt her breasts were to be pressed by me?How smooth a belly under her waist saw I?How large a leg, and what a lusty thigh?To leave the rest, all liked me passing well,I clinged her naked body, down she fell,Judge you the rest: being tired she bad me kiss,Jove send me more such afternoons as this. 
***
Leave go my hands, let me catch breath and see; Let the dew-fall drench either side of me;     Clear apple-leaves are soft upon that moon Seen sidelong like a blossom in the tree;     And God, ah God, that day should be so soon. The grass is thick and cool, it lets us lie. Kissed upon either cheek and either eye,     I turn to thee as some green afternoon Turns toward sunset, and is loth to die;     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. Lie closer, lean your face upon my side, Feel where the dew fell that has hardly dried,     Hear how the blood beats that went nigh to swoon; The pleasure lives there when the sense has died,     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. O my fair lord, I charge you leave me this: It is not sweeter than a foolish kiss?     Nay take it then, my flower, my first in June, My rose, so like a tender mouth it is:     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. Love, till dawn sunder night from day with fire Dividing my delight and my desire,     The crescent life and love the plenilune, Love me though dusk begin and dark retire;     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. Ah, my heart fails, my blood draws back; I know, When life runs over, life is near to go;     And with the slain of love love’s ways are strewn, And with their blood, if love will have it so;     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. Ah, do thy will now; slay me if thou wilt; There is no building now the walls are built,     No quarrying now the corner-stone is hewn, No drinking now the vine’s whole blood is spilt;     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. Nay, slay me now; nay, for I will be slain; Pluck thy red pleasure from the teeth of pain,     Break down thy vine ere yet grape-gatherers prune, Slay me ere day can slay desire again;     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. Yea, with thy sweet lips, with thy sweet sword; yea Take life and all, for I will die, I say;     Love, I gave love, is life a better boon? For sweet night’s sake I will not live till day;     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. Nay, I will sleep then only; nay, but go. Ah sweet, too sweet to me, my sweet, I know     Love, sleep, and death go to the sweet same tune; Hold my hair fast, and kiss me through it soon.     Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon. 
***
Ask me no more where Jove bestows, When June is past, the fading rose; For in your beauty’s orient deep These flowers, as in their causes, sleep. Ask me no more whither do stray The golden atoms of the day; For in pure love heaven did prepare Those powders to enrich your hair. Ask me no more whither doth haste The nightingale, when May is past; For in your sweet dividing throat She winters, and keeps warm her note. Ask me no more where those stars ’light, That downwards fall in dead of night; For in your eyes they sit, and there Fixed become, as in their sphere. Ask me no more if east or west The phoenix builds her spicy nest; For unto you at last she flies, And in your fragrant bosom dies. 
***
Kiss’d yestreen, and kiss’d yestreen,Up the Gallowgate, down the Green:I’ve woo’d wi’ lords, and woo’d wi’ lairds,I’ve mool’d wi carles and mell’d wi’ cairds,I’ve kiss’d wi’ priests— ‘twas done i’ the dark,Twice in my gown and thrice in my sark;But priest, nor lord, nor loon can gieSic kindly kisses as he gae me.
***
There was ance a may, and she lo’ed na men;She biggit her bonnie bow’r doun i’ yon glen;But now she cries, Dool and a well-a-day!Come doun the green gait and come here away!When bonnie young Johnnie cam’ owre the seaHe said he saw naething sae lovely as me;He hecht me baith rings and monie braw things;And werena my heart licht, I wad dee.He had a wee tittie that lo’ed na me,Because I was twice as bonnie as she;She raised sic a pother ‘twixt him and his mother,That werena my heart licht, I wad dee.The day it was set, and the bridal to beThe wife took a dwam and lay doun to dee;She maned, and she graned, out o’ dolour and pain,Till he vowed that he ne’er wad see me again.His kin was for ane o’ a higher degree,Said, what had he do wi’ the likes o’ me?Albeit I was bonnie, I wasna for Johnnie:And werena my heart licht, I wad dee.They said I had neither cow nor calf,Nor dribbles o’ drink rins through the draff,Nor pickles o’meal rins through the mill-e’e;An werena my heart licht, I wad dee.His tittie she was baith wily and slee,She spied me as I cam’ owre the lea,And then she ran in and made a loud din;Believe your ain een an ye trow na me.His bannet stood aye fu’ round on his browHis auld ane looked aye as weel as some’s new;But now he lets ’t wear ony gate it will hing,And casts himsel’ dowie upon the corn-bing.And now he gaes daund’ring about the dykesA a’ he dow do is to hund the tykes;The love-lang nicht he ne’er steeks his e’e;And werena my heart licht I wad dee.Were I but young for thee, as I ha’e beenWe should ha’e been gallopin’ doun in yon green,And linkin’ it on the lily-white lea;And wow, gin I were but young for thee.
***
When you gain her Affection, take care to preserve it;Lest others persuade her, you do not deserve it.Still study to heighten the Joys of her Life;Not treat her the worse, for her being your Wife.If in Judgment she errs, set her right, without Pride:’Tis the Province of insolent Fools, to deride.A Husband’s first Praise, is a Friend and Protector:Then change not these Titles, for Tyrant and Hector.Let your Person be neat, unaffectedly clean,Tho’ alone with your wife the whole Day you remain.Chuse Books, for her study, to fashion her Mind,To emulate those who excell’d of her Kind.Be Religion the principal Care of your Life,As you hope to be blest in your Children and Wife:So you, in your Marriage, shall gain its true End;And find, in your Wife, a Companion and Friend.
***
Incautious Youth, why do'st thou so mis-placeThy fine Encomiums on an o’er-blown Face;Which after all the Varnish of thy Quill,Its Pristine wrinkles shew apparent still:Nor is it in the power of Youth to moveAn Age-chill’d heart to any strokes of Love.Then chuse some budding Beauty, which in timeMay crown thy Wishes in thy blooming prime:For nought can make a more preposterous show,Than April’s Flowers stuck on St. Michael’s Bow.To consecrate thy first-born Sighs to me,A superannuated Deity;Makes that Idolatry and deadly Sin,Which otherwise had only Venial been.
***
Slight unpremeditated Words are borne   By every common Wind into the Air;Carelessly utter’d, die as soon as born,   And in one instant give both Hope and Fear:Breathing all Contraries with the same WindAccording to the Caprice of the Mind.But Billetdoux are constant Witnesses,   Substantial Records to Eternity;Just Evidences, who the Truth confess,   On which the Lover safely may rely;They’re serious Thoughts, digested and resolv’d;And last, when Words are into Clouds devolv’d.
***
Since man with that inconstancy was born,To love the absent, and the present scorn   Why do we deck, why do we dress   For such short-lived happiness?   Why do we put attraction on,Since either way ’tis we must be undone?   They fly if honour take our part,   Our virtue drives ’em o’er the field.   We love ’em by too much desert,   And oh! they fly us if we yield.Ye gods! is there no charm in all the fairTo fix this wild, this faithless wanderer?   Man! our great business and our aim,   For whom we spread our fruitless snares,No sooner kindles the designing flame,   But to the next bright object bearsThe trophies of his conquest and our shame:   Inconstancy’s the good supremeThe rest is airy notion, empty dream!   Then heedless nymph, be rul’d by me   If e’re your swain the bliss desire;       Think like Alexis he may be       Whose wisht possession damps his fire;       The roving youth in every shadeHas left some sighing and abandon’d maid,For ’tis a fatal lesson he has learn’d,After fruition ne’er to be concern’d.
***
O Love! that stronger art than wine, Pleasing delusion, witchery divine, Wont to be prized above all wealth, Disease that has more joys than health; Though we blaspheme thee in our pain, And of thy tyranny complain, We are all bettered by they reign.        What reason never can bestow We to this useful passion owe; Love wakes the dull from sluggish ease, And learns a clown the art to please, Humbles the vain, kindles the cold, Makes misers free, and cowards bold; ’Tis he reforms the sot from drink, And teaches airy fops to think. When full brute appetite is fed, And choked the glutton lies and dead, Thou new spirits dost dispense And ’finest the gross delights of sense: Virtue’s unconquerable aid That against Nature can persuade, And makes a roving mind retire Within the bounds of just desire; Cheerer of age, youth’s kind unrest, And half the heaven of the blest! 
***
No more alone sleeping, no more alone waking,  Thy dreams divided, thy prayers in twain;Thy merry sisters tonight forsaking,  Never shall we see, maiden, again.Never shall we see thee, thine eyes glancing.  Flashing with laughter and wild in glee,Under the mistletoe kissing and dancing,  Wantonly free.There shall come a matron walking sedately,   Low-voiced, gentle, wise in reply.Tell me, O tell me, can I love her greatly?  All for her sake must the maiden die!
***
Oh, how the hand the lover ought to prize   ’Bove any one peculiar grace!While he is dying for the eyes   And doting on the lovely face,The unconsid’ring little knowsHow much he to this beauty owes.That, when the lover absent is,   Informs him of his mistress’ heart;’Tis that which gives him all his bliss   When dear love-secrets ’twill impart:That plights the faith the maid bestows,And that confirms the tim’rous vows.’Tis that betrays the tenderness   Which the too bashful tongue denies;’Tis that which does the heart confess,   And spares the language of the eyes;’Tis that which treasure gives so vast,Ev’n Iris ’twill to Damon give at last.
***
Had I remained in innocent security,I should have thought all men were born my slaves,And worn my power like lightning in my eyes,To have destroyed at pleasure when offended.—But when love held the mirror, the undeceiving glassReflected all the weakness of my soul, and made me knowMy richest treasure being lost, my honour,All the remaining spoil could not be worthThe conqueror’s care or value.—Oh how I fell like a long worshipped idolDiscovering all the cheat.
***
Amyntas led me to a Grove,   Where all the Trees did shade us;The Sun it self, though it had Strove,   It could not have betray’d us:The place secur’d from humane Eyes,   No other fear allows.But when the Winds that gently rise,   Doe Kiss the yielding Boughs.Down there we satt upon the Moss,   And id begin to playA Thousand Amorous Tricks, to pass   The heat of all the day.A many Kisses he did give:   And I return’d the sameWhich made me willing to receive   That which I dare not name.His Charming Eyes no Aid requir’d   To tell their softning Tale;On her that was already fir’d   ’Twas easy to prevaile.He did but Kiss and Clasp me round,   Whilst those his thoughts Exprest:And lay’d me gently on the Ground;   Ah who can guess the rest?
***
Our oneness is the wrestlers’, fierce and close,   Thrusting and thrust;One life in dual effort for one prize,—   We fight, and must;For soul with soul does battle evermore   Till love be trust.Our distance is love’s severance; sense divides,   Each is but each;Never the very hidden spirit of thee   My life doth reach;Twain! Since love athwart the gulf that needs   Kisses and speech.Ah! wrestle closelier! we draw nearer so   Than any blissCan bring twain souls who would be whole and one,   Too near to kiss:To be one thought, one voice before we die,—   Wrestle for this.
***
And ye shall walk in silk attire,   And siller hae to spare,Gin ye’ll consent to be his bride,    Nor think o’ Donald mair.O wha wad buy a silken goun    Wi’ a poor broken heart!Or what’s to me a siller croun,    Gin frae my love I part!The mind wha’s every wish is pure    Far dearer is to me;And ere I’m forc’d to break my faith,    I’ll lay me down an’ dee!For I hae pledg’d my virgin troth    Brave Donald’s fate to share;And he has gi’en to me his heart,    Wi’ a’ its virtues rare.His gentle manners wan my heart,    He gratefu’ took the gift;Could I but think to seek it back,    It wad be waur than theft!For langest life can ne’er repay    The love he bears to me;And ere I’m forc’d to break my troth,    I’ll lay me doun an’ dee.
***
O Donald! ye are just the man  Who, when he’s got a wife,Begins to fratch— nae notice ta’en—  They’re strangers a’ their life.The fan may drop— she takes it up,  The husband keeps his chair;She hands the kettle— gives his cup—  Without e’en— thank ye, dear.”Now, truly, these slights are but toys;  But frae neglects like these,The wife may soon a slattern grow,  And strive nae mair to please.For wooers ay do all they can  To trifle wi’ the mind;They hold the blaze of beauty up,  And keep the poor things blind.But wedlock tears away the veil,  The goddess is nae mair;He thinks his wife a silly thing,  She thinks her man a bear.Let then the lover be the friend—  The loving friend for life;Think but thysel the happiest spouse,  She’ll be the happiest wife.
***
And auld Robin Forbes hes gien tem a dance,I pat on my speckets to see them aw prance;I thout o’ the days when I was but fifteen,And skipp’d wi’ the best upon Forbes’s green.Of aw things that is I think thout is meast queer,It brings that that’s by-past and sets it down here;I see Willy as plain as I dui this bit leace,When he tuik his cwoat lappet and deeghted his feace.The lasses aw wonder’d what Willy cud seeIn yen that was dark and hard featur’d leyke me;And they wonder’d ay mair when they talk’d o’ my wit,And slily telt Willy that cudn’t be it:But Willy he laugh’d, and he meade me his weyfe,And whea was mair happy thro’ aw his lang leyfe?It’s e’en my great comfort, now Willy is geane,The he offen said— nae place was leyke his awn heame!I mind when I carried my wark to yon steyleWhere Willy was deykin, the time to beguile,He wad fling me a daisy to put i’ my breast,And I hammer’d my noddle to mek out a jest.But merry or grave, Willy often wad tellThere was nin o’ the leave that was leyke my awn sel;And he spak what he thout, for I’d hardly a plackWhen we married, and nobbet ae gown to my back.When the clock had struck eight I expected him heame,And wheyles went to meet him as far as Dumleane;Of aw hours it telt eight was dearest to me,But now when it streykes there’s a tear i’ my ee.O Willy! dear Willy! it never can beThat age, time, or death, can divide thee and me!For that spot on earth that’s aye dearest to me,Is the turf that has cover’d my Willy frae me!
***
Once we played at love together—   Played it smartly, if you please;Lightly, as a windblown feather,   Did we stake a heart apiece.Oh, it was delicious fooling!   In the hottest of the game,Without thought of future cooling,   All too quickly burned Life’s flame.In this give-and-take of glances,   Kisses sweet as honey dews,When we played with equal chances,   Did you win, or did I lose?
***
Come, the wind may never againBlow as now it blows for us;And the stars may never again shine as now they shine;Long before October returns,Seas of blood will have parted us;And you must crush the love in your heart, and I the love in mine!
***
Love is like the wild rose-briar,Friendship like the holly-tree—The holly is dark when the rose-briar bloomsBut which will bloom most constantly?The wild rose-briar is sweet in spring,Its summer blossoms scent the air;Yet wait till winter comes againAnd who will call the wild-briar fair?Then scorn the silly rose-wreath nowAnd deck thee with the holly’s sheen,That when December blights thy browHe still may leave thy garland green.
***
Beloved, thou hast brought me many flowers   Plucked in the garden, all the summer through   And winter, and it seemed as if they grewIn this close room, nor missed the sun and showers,So, in the like name of that love of ours,   Take back these thoughts which here unfolded too,   And which on warm and cold days I withdrewFrom my heart’s ground. Indeed, those beds and bowers   Be overgrown with bitter weeds and rue,And wait thy weeding; yet here’s eglantine,   Here’s ivy!— take them, as I used to doThy flowers, and keep them where they shall not pine.   Instruct thine eyes to keep their colours true,And tell thy soul, their roots are left in mine.
***
The clouds had made a crimson crown   Above the mountains high.The stormy sun was going down   In a stormy sky.Why did you let your eyes so rest on me,   And hold your breath between?In all the ages this can never be   As if it had not been.
***
I lift my heavy heart up solemnly, As once Electra her sepulchral urn, And, looking in thine eyes, I overturn The ashes at thy feet. Behold and see What a great heap of grief lay hid in me, And how the red wild sparkles dimly burn Through the ashen greyness. If thy foot in scorn Could tread them out to darkness utterly, It might be well perhaps. But if instead Thou wait beside me for the wind to blow The grey dust up,... those laurels on thine head, O My beloved, will not shield thee so, That none of all the fires shall scorch and shred The hair beneath. Stand further off then! Go.
***
Blindfold I should to Myra run,And swear to love her ever;Yet when the bandage was undone,Should only think her clever.With the full usage of my eyes,I Chloe should decide for;But when she talks, I her despise,Whom, dumb, I could have died for!
***
Would but indulgent Fortune sendTo me a kind, and faithful Friend,One who to Virtue’s Laws is true,And does her nicest Rules pursue;One Pious, Lib’ral, Just and Brave,And to his Passions not a Slave;Who full of Honour, void of Pride,Will freely praise, and freely chide;But not indulge the smallest Fault,Nor entertain one slighting Thought:Who still the same will ever prove,Will still instruct and still will love:In whom I safely may confide,And with him all my Cares divide:Who has a large capacious Mind,Join’d with a Knowledge unconfin’d:A Reason bright, a Judgement true,A Wit both quick, and solid too:Who can of all things talk with Ease,And whose Converse will ever please:Who charm’d with Wit, and inward Graces,Despises Fools with tempting Faces;And still a beauteous Mind does prizeAbove the most enchanting Eyes:I would not envy Queens their State,Nor once desire a happier Fate.
***
Why, Damon, why, why, why so pressing?The Heart you beg’s not worth possessing:Each Look, each Word, each Smile’s affected,And inward Charms are quite neglected:   Then scorn her, scorn her, foolish Swain,   And sigh no more, no more in vain.Beauty’s worthless, fading, flying;Who would for Trifles think of dying?Who for a Face, a Shape, wou’d languish,And tell the Brooks, and Groves his Anguish,   Till she, till she thinks fit to prize him,   And all, and all beside despise him?Fix, fix your Thoughts on what’s inviting,On what will never bear the slighting:Wit and Virtue claim your Duty,They’re much more worth than Gold and Beauty:   To them, to them, your Heart resign,   And you’ll no more, no more repine.
***
Ah, gaze not on those eyes! forbear   That soft enchanting voice to hear:Not looks of basilisks give surer death,Nor Syrens sing with more destructive breath.   Fly, if thy freedom thou’dst maintain,   Alas! I feel th’advice is vain!A heart, whose safety but in flight does lie,Is too far lost to have the power to fly.
***
Soft kisses may be innocent;But ah! too easy maid, beware;Tho’ that is all thy kindness meant,’Tis love’s delusive, fatal snare.No virgin e’er at first design’dThro’ all the maze of love to stray;But each new path allures her mind,Till wandering on, she lose her way.’Tis easy ere set out to stay;But who the useful art can teach,When sliding down a steepy way,To stop, before the end we reach?Keep ever something in thy power,Beyond what would thy honour stain:He will not dare to aim at more,Who for small favours sighs in vain.
***
‘The myrtle bush grew shadyDown by the ford.’‘Is it even so?’ said my lady.‘Even so!’ said my lord.‘The leaves are set too thick togetherFor the point of a sword.‘The arras in your room hangs close,No light between!You wedded one of those that see unseen.’‘Is it even so?’ said the King’s Majesty.‘Even so!’ said the Queen.
***
Could you come back to me, Douglas, Douglas,In the old likeness that I knew,I would be so faithful, so loving, Douglas,Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.Never a scornful word should grieve ye,I’d smile on ye sweet as the angels do,—Sweet as your smile on me shone ever,Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.Oh, to call back the days that are not!My eyes were blinded, your words were few;Do you know the truth now up in heaven,Douglas, Douglas, tender and true?I never was worthy of you, Douglas;Not half worthy the like of you:Now all men beside seem to me like shadows—I love you, Douglas, tender and true.Stretch out your hand to me, Douglas, Douglas,Drop forgiveness from heaven like dew;As I lay my heart on your dead heart, Douglas,Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.
***
There is a strong wall about me to protect me: It is built of the words you have said to me. There are swords about me to keep me safe: They are the kisses of your lips. Before me goes a shield to guard me from harm: It is the shadow of your arms between me and danger. All the wishes of my mind know your name, And the white desires of my heart They are acquainted with you. The cry of my body for completeness, That is a cry to you. My blood beats out your name to me,     unceasing, pitiless Your name, your name.
***
Give, give me back that Trifle you despise,Give back my Heart, with all its Injuries:Tho’ by your Cruelty it wounded be,The Thing is yet of wond’rous Use to me.A gen’rous Conqueror, when the Battle’s won,Bestows a Charity on the Undone:If from the well aim’d Stroke no Hope appear,He kills the Wretch, and shews Compassion there:But you, Barbarian! keep alive Pain,A lasting Trophy of Unjust Disdain.
***
A Scholar first my Love implor’d,And then an empty, titled Lord;The Pedant talk’d in lofty Strains;Alas! his Lordship wanted Brains:I list’ned not, to one or t’other,But straight referr’d them to my Mother.A Poet next my Love assail’d,A Lawyer hop’d to have prevail’d;The Bard too much approv’d himself,The Lawyer thirsted after Pelf:I list’ned not, to one or t’other,But still referr’d them to my Mother.An Officer my Heart wou’d storm,A Miser, sought me too, in Form;But Mars was over-free and bold,The miser’s Heart was in his Gold:I list’ned not, to one or t’other,Referring still unto my Mother.And after them, some twenty more,Successless were, as those before;When Damon, lovely Damon came!Our Hearts strait felt a mutual Flame;I vow’d I’d have him, and no other,Without referring, to my Mother.
***
My dearest dust, could not thy hasty dayAfford thy drowzy patience leave to stayOne hower longer: so that we might eitherSate up, or gone to bedd together?But since thy finisht labor hath possestThy weary limbs with early rest,Enjoy it sweetly: and thy widdowe brideShall soone repose her by thy slumbring side.Whose business, now, is only to prepareMy nightly dress, and call to prayre:Mine eyes wax heavy and ye day growes old.The dew falls thick, my beloved growes cold.Draw, draw ye closed curtaynes: and make room:My dear, my dearest dust; I come, I come. 
***
Good Heav’n, I thank thee, since it was designedI should be framed, but of the weaker kind,That yet, my Soul, is rescued from the loveOf all those trifles which their passions move.Pleasures and praise and plenty have with meBut their just value. If allowed they be,Freely, and thankfully as much I taste,As will not reason or religion waste,If they’re denied, I on my self can live,And slight those aids unequal chance does give.When in the sun, my wings can be displayed,And, in retirement, I can bless the shade.
***
When from the world, I shall be tane,And from earths necessary paine,Then let no blacks be worne for me,Not in a Ring my dear by thee.But this bright Diamond, let it beWorn in remembrance of me.And when it sparkles in your eye,Think ’tis my shadow passeth by.For why, more bright you shall me see,Then that or any Gem can bee.Dress not the house with sable weed,As if there was some dismal deedActed to be when I am gone,There is no cause for me to mourn.And let no badge of Herald beThe sign of my Antiquity.It was my glory I did springFrom heavens eternall powerful King:To his bright Palace heir am I.It is his promise, hee’l not lye.By my dear Brother lay me,It was a promise made by thee,And now I must bid thee adieu,For I’me a parting now from you.
***
Why do I love? Go, ask the Glorious Sun Why every day it round the world doth run; Ask Thames and Tiber, why they Ebb and Flow: Ask Damask Roses why in June they blow; Ask Ice and Hail, the reason, why they’re Cold: Decaying Beauties, why they will grow Old They’ll tell thee, Fate, that every thing doth move, Inforces them to this, and me to Love. There is no Reason for our Love or Hate; ’Tis irresistible, as Death or Fate; ’Tis not his face; I’ve sence enough to see, That is not good, though doated on by me; Not is’t his Tongue, that has this Conquest won; For that at least is equall’d by my own: His Carriage can to none obliging be, ’Tis Rude, Affected, full of Vanity: Strangely Ill-natur’d, Peevish and Unkind, Unconstant, False, to Jealousie inclin’d, His Temper cou’d not have so great a Pow’r, ’Tis mutable, and changes every hour: Those vigorous Years that Women so Adore, Are past in him: he’s twice my Age, and more; And yet I love this false, this worthless Man With all the Passion that a Woman can; Doat on his Imperfections, though I spy Nothing to Love; I Love, and know not why. Since ’tis Decreed in the dark Book of Fate That I shou’d Love, and he shou’d be ingrate.
***
My Love? alas! I must not call you Mine,But to your envy’d Bride that Name resign:I must forget your lovely melting Charms,And be for ever Banisht from your Arms:For ever? oh! the Horror of that Sound!It gives my bleeding Heart a deadly wound:While I might hope, although my Hope was vain,It gave some Ease to my unpitty’d Pain,But now your Hymen doth all Hope exclude,And but to think is Sin; yet you intrudeOn every Thought; if I but close my Eyes,Methinks your pleasing Form besides me lies;With every Sigh I gently breath your Name,Yet no ill Thoughts pollute my hallow’d Flame;’Tis pure and harmless, as a Lambent Fire,And never mingled with a warm Desire:All I have now to ask of Bounteous Heaven,Is, that your Perjuries may be forgiven:That she who you have with your Nuptials blest,As She’s the Happiest Wife, may prove the Best:That all our Joys may light on you alone,Then I can be contented to have none:And never wish that you shou’d kinder be,Than now and then, to cast a Thought on Me:And, Madam, though the Conquest you have won,Over my Strephon, has my hopes undone;I’le daily beg of Heaven, he may beKinder to You, than he has been to Me.
***
Farewell my dearer half, joy of my heart,Heaven only knows how loth I am to part:Whole Months but hours seem, when you are here,When absent, every Minute is a Year:Might I but always see thy charming Face,I’de live on Racks, and wish no easier place.But we must part, your Interest says we must;Fate, me no longer with such Treasure trust.I wou’d not tax you with Inconstancy,Yet Strephon, you are not so kind as I:No Interest, no nor Fate it self has pow’rTo tempt me from the Idol I adore:But since you needs will go, may Africk beKinder to you, than Europe is to me:May all you meet and every thing you viewGive you such Transport as I met in you.May no sad thoughts disturb your quiet mind,Except you’l think of her you left behind.
***
Since you dare Brave me, with a Rivals Name,You shall prevail, and I will quite my Claime:For know, proud Maid, I Scorn to call him mine,Whom thou durst ever hope to have made thine:Yet I confess, I lov’d him once so well,His presence was my Heav’n, his absence Hell:With gen’rous excellence I fill’d his Brest,And in sweet Beauteous Forms his Person drest;For him I did heaven, and its Pow’r despise,And onely lived by th’Influence of his Eyes:I fear’d not Rivals, for I thought that heThat was possess’d of such a Prize as me,All meaner Objects wou’d Contemn, and Slight,Nor let an abject thing Usurpe my Right:But when I heard he was so wretched BaseTo pay devotion to thy wrinkled FaceI Banish’t him my sight, and told the Slave,He had not Worth, but what my Fancy gave:’Twas I that rais’d him to this Glorious State,And can as easily Annihilate:But let him live, Branded with Guilt and Shame,And Shrink into the Shade from whence he came;His Punishment shall be, the Loss of Me,And be Augumented, by his gaining Thee.
***
You ask me what since we must partYou shall bring back to me.Bring back a pure and faithful heartAs true as mine to thee.You talk of gems from foreign lands,Of treasure, spoil, and prize.Ah love! I shall not search your handsBut look into your eyes.
***
When last we parted, thou wert young and fair,   How beautiful let fond remembrance say!   Alas! since then old time has stolen awayFull thirty years, leaving my temples bare.—So has it perished like a thing of air,   The dream of love and youth!— now both are grey   Yet still remembering that delightful day,Though time with his cold touch has blanched my hair,   Though I have suffered many years of painSince then, though I did never think to live   To hear that voice or see those eyes again,I can a sad but cordial greeting give,And for thy welfare breathe as warm a prayer—As when I loved thee young and fair.
***
Love, thou art best of Human Joys,   Our chiefest Happiness below;All other Pleasures are but Toys,Musick without Thee is but Noise,     And Beauty but an empty show.Heav’n , who knew best what Man wou’d move,   And raise his Thoughts above the Brute;Said, Let him Be, and Let him Love;That must alone his Soul improve,     Howe’er Philosophers dispute.
***
This to the crown and blessing of my life,The much loved husband of a happy wife;To him whose constant passion found the artTo win a stubborn and ungrateful heart,And to the world by tenderest proof discoversThey err, who say that husbands can’t be lovers.With such return of passion as is due,Daphnis I love, Daphnis my thoughts pursue;Daphnis my hopes and joys are bounded all in you.Even I, for Daphnis’ and my promise’ sake,What I in women censure, undertake.But this from love, not vanity, proceeds;You know who writes, and I who ’tis that reads.Judge not my passion by my want of skill:Many love well, though they express it ill;And I your censure could with pleasure bear,Would you but soon return, and speak it here.
***
I sowed the seeds of loveTo blossom all the spring,In April, May, or else in June,When the small birds do sing:A gardener standing by,I desired him to choose for me;He picked out the lily, the violet, and pink,But I refused all three.The lily I refused,Because it faded so soon;The violet and pink I overlooked,Resolved was to tarry till June:In June the red roses bud,Oh, that is a lover for me;But I have often aimed at the red rose-bud,And I have gained the willow tree.The gardener standing by,He prayed me to have a care,For the thorn that grew on the red rose-bush,A venomous thorn they were:A venomous thorn indeed,For still I feel the smart;And every time I did it touch,It pricked my tender heart.Away you fading flowers,No more I will you touch,That all the world may plainly seeI loved one flower too much.
***
I sing the man that never equal knew, Whose mighty arms all Asia did subdue, Whose conquests through the spacious world do ring, That city-raser, king-destroying king, Who o’er the warlike Macedons did reign, And worthily the name of Great did gain. This is the prince (if fame you will believe, To ancient story any credit give.) Who when the globe of Earth he had subdued, With tears the easy victory pursued; Because that no more worlds there were to win, No further scene to act his glories in.     Ah that some pitying Muse would now inspire My frozen style with a poetic fire, And raptures worthy of his matchless fame, Whose deeds I sing, whose never fading name Long as the world shall fresh and deathless last, No less to future ages, then the past. Great my presumption is, I must confess, But if I thrive, my glory’s ne’er the less; Nor will it from his conquests derogate A female pen his acts did celebrate. If thou O Muse wilt thy assistance give, Such as made Naso and great Maro live, With him whom Melas’ fertile banks did bear, Live, though their bodies dust and ashes are; Whose laurels were not fresher, than their fame Is now, and will for ever be the same. If the like favor thou wilt grant to me, O Queen of Verse, I’ll not ungrateful be, My choicest hours to thee I’ll dedicate, ’Tis thou shalt rule, ’tis thou shalt be my fate. But if coy goddess thou shalt this deny, And from my humble suit disdaining fly, I’ll stoop and beg no more, since I know this, Writing of him, I cannot write amiss: His lofty deeds will raise each feeble line, And god-like acts will make my verse divine.     ’Twas at the time the golden sun doth rise, And with his beams enlights the azure skies, When lo a troop in silver arms drew near, The glorious sun did nere so bright appear; Dire scarlet plumes adorned their haughty crests, And crescent shields did shade their shining breasts; Down from their shoulders hung a panther’s hide, A bow and quiver rattled by their side; Their hands a knotty well tried spear did bear, Jocund they seemed, and quite devoid of fear. These warlike virgins were, that do reside   Near Thermodon’s smooth banks and verdant side, The plains of Themiscyre their birth do boast, Thalestris now did head the beauteous host; She emulating that illustrious dame, Who to the aid of Troy and Priam came, And her who the Retulian prince did aid, Though dearly both for their assistance paid. But fear she scorned, nor the like fate did dread, Her host she often to the field had led, As oft in triumph had returned again, Glory she only sought for all her pain.     This martial queen had heard how loudly fame, Echoed our conqueror’s redoubted name, Her soul his conduct and his courage fired, To see the hero she so much admired; And to Hyrcania for this cause she went, Where Alexander (wholly then intent On triumphs and such military sport) At truce with war held both his camp and court. And while before the town she did attend Her messengers return, she saw ascend A cloud of dust, that covered all the sky, And still at every pause there stroke her eye. The interrupted beams of burnished gold, As dust the splendor hid, or did unfold; Loud neighings of the steeds, and trumpets’ sound Filled all the air, and echoed from the ground; The gallant Greeks with a brisk march drew near, And their great chief did at their head appear. And now come up to th’Amazonian band, They made a halt and a respectful stand: And both the troops (with like amazement strook) Did each on other with deep silence look. Th’heroic queen (whose high pretence to war Cancelled the bashful laws and nicer bar Of modesty, which did her sex restrain) First boldly did advance before her train, And thus she spake. All but a god in name, And that a debt time owes unto thy fame.          This was the first essay of this young lady in          poetry, but finding the task she had undertaken          hard, she laid it by till practice and more time          should make her equal to so great a work.***
Did I, my lines intend for public view,How many censures, would their faults pursue,Some would, because such words they do affect,Cry they’re insipid, empty, and uncorrect.And many have attained, dull and untaught,The name of wit only by finding fault.True judges might condemn their want of wit,And all might say, they’re by a woman writ.Alas! a woman that attempts the pen,Such an intruder on the rights of men,Such a presumptuous creature, is esteemed,The fault can by no virtue be redeemed.They tell us we mistake our sex and way;Good breeding, fashion, dancing, dressing, playAre the accomplishments we should desire;To write, or read, or think, or to inquireWould cloud our beauty, and exhaust our time,And interrupt the conquests of our prime;Whilst the dull manage of a servile houseIs held by some our outmost art, and use.   Sure ’twas not ever thus, nor are we toldFables, of women that excelled of old;To whom, by the diffusive hand of Heaven Some share of wit, and poetry was given.On that glad day, on which the Ark returned,The holy pledge, for which the land had mourned,The joyful tribes, attend it on the way,The Levites do the sacred charge convey,Whilst various instruments, before it play;Here, holy virgins in the concert joinThe louder notes, to soften, and refine,And with alternate verse complete the hymn divine.Lo! the young Poet, after God’s own heart,By Him inspired, and taught the Muses’ art,Returned from conquest, a bright chorus meets,That sing his slain ten thousand in the streets.In such loud numbers they his acts declare,Proclaim the wonders of his early war,That Saul upon the vast applause does frown,And feels its mighty thunder shake the crown.What, can the threatened judgment now prolong?Half of the kingdom is already gone;The fairest half, whose influence guides the rest,Have David’s empire o’er their hearts confessed.   A woman here, leads fainting Israel on,She fights, she wins, she triumphs with a song,Devout, majestic, for the subject fit,And far above her arms, exalts her wit;Then, to the peaceful, shady palm withdraws,And rules the rescued nation, with her laws.How are we fall’n, fall’n by mistaken rules?And education’s, more than nature’s fools,Debarred from all improvements of the mind,And to be dull, expected and designed;And if some one would soar above the rest,With warmer fancy, and ambition pressed,So strong th’ opposing faction still appears,The hopes to thrive can ne’er outweigh the fears,Be cautioned then my Muse, and still retired;Nor be despised, aiming to be admired;Conscious of wants, still with contracted wing,To some few friends, and to thy sorrows sing;For groves of laurel thou wert never meant;Be dark enough thy shades, and be thou there content.
***
What art thou, Spleen, which ev’ry thing dost ape?  Thou Proteus to abused mankind,  Who never yet thy real cause could find,Or fix thee to remain in one continued shape.  Still varying thy perplexing form,  Now a Dead Sea thou’lt represent,  A calm of stupid discontent,Then, dashing on the rocks wilt rage into a storm.  Trembling sometimes thou dost appear,  Dissolved into a panic fear;  On sleep intruding dost thy shadows spread,  Thy gloomy terrors round the silent bed,And crowd with boding dreams the melancholy head;  Or, when the midnight hour is told,  And drooping lids thou still dost waking hold,  Thy fond delusions cheat the eyes,  Before them antic specters dance,Unusual fires their pointed heads advance,  And airy phantoms rise.  Such was the monstrous vision seen,When Brutus (now beneath his cares opprest,And all Rome’s fortunes rolling in his breast,  Before Philippi’s latest field,Before his fate did to Octavius lead)  Was vanquished by the Spleen.  Falsely, the mortal part we blame  Or our depressed, and pond’rous frame,  Which, till the first degrading sin  Let thee, its dull attendant, in,  Still with the other did comply,Nor clogged the active soul, disposed to fly,And range the mansions of its native sky.  Nor, whilst in his own heaven he dwelt,  Whilst Man his paradise possessed,His fertile Garden in the fragrant East,  And all united odors smelled,  No armèd sweets, until thy reign,  Could shock the sense, or in the face  A flushed, unhandsome color place.Now the jonquil o’ercomes the feeble brain;We faint beneath the aromatic pain,Till some offensive scent thy pow’rs appease,And pleasure we resign for short and nauseous ease.  In ev’ry one thou dost possess,  New are thy motions, and thy dress:  Now in some grove a list’ning friend  Thy false suggestions must attend,Thy whispered griefs, thy fancied sorrows hear,Breathed in a sigh, and witnessed by a tear;  Whilst in the light and vulgar crowd,  Thy slaves, more clamorous and loud,By laughters unprovoked, thy influence too confess.In the imperious wife thou vapors art,  Which from o’erheated passions rise  In clouds to the attractive brain,  Until descending thence again,  Through the o’er-cast and show’ring eyes,  Upon her husband’s softened heart,  He the disputed point must yield,Something resign of the contested field;Till lordly Man, born to imperial sway,Compounds for peace, to make that right away,And Woman, arm’d with Spleen, does servilely obey.  The fool, to imitate the wits,  Complains of thy pretended fits,  And dullness, born with him, would lay  Upon thy accidental sway;  Because, sometimes, thou dost presume  Into the ablest heads to come:  That, often, men of thoughts refined,  Impatient of unequal sense,Such slow returns, where they so much dispense,Retiring from the crowd, are to thy shades inclined.  O’er me alas! thou dost too much prevail:  I feel thy force, whilst I against thee rail;I feel my verse decay, and my cramped numbers fail.Through thy black jaundice I all objects see,  As dark and terrible as thee,My lines decried, and my employment thoughtAn useless folly, or presumptuous fault:  Whilst in the Muses’ paths I stray,Whilst in their groves, and by their secret springsMy hand delights to trace unusual things,And deviates from the known and common way;  Nor will in fading silks compose    Faintly th’ inimitable rose,Fill up an ill-drawn bird, or paint on glassThe sov’reign’s blurred and undistinguished face,The threat’ning angel, and the speaking ass.  Patron thou art to ev’ry gross abuse,       The sullen husband’s feigned excuse, When the ill humor with his wife he spends,And bears recruited wit, and spirits to his friends.       The son of Bacchus pleads thy pow’r,       As to the glass he still repairs,       Pretends but to remove thy cares,Snatch from thy shades one gay and smiling hour,And drown thy kingdom in a purple show’r.When the Coquette, whom ev’ry fool admires,       Would in variety be fair,       And, changing hastily the scene,       From light, impertinent, and vain,Assumes a soft, a melancholy air,And of her eyes rebates the wand’ring fires,The careless posture, and the head reclined,       The thoughtful, and composèd face,  Proclaiming the withdrawn, the absent mind,  Allows the Fop more liberty to gaze,  Who gently for the tender cause inquires;  The cause, indeed, is a defect in sense,Yet is the Spleen alleged, and still the dull pretence.       But these are thy fantastic harms,        The tricks of thy pernicious stage,       Which do the weaker sort engage;  Worse are the dire effects of thy more pow’rful charms.       By thee Religion, all we know,       That should enlighten here below,       Is veiled in darkness, and perplexed  With anxious doubts, with endless scruples vexed,And some restraint implied from each perverted text.  Whilst touch not, taste not, what is freely giv’n,Is but thy niggard voice, disgracing bounteous heav’n.  From speech restrained, by thy deceits abused,  To deserts banished, or in cells reclused,  Mistaken vot’ries to the pow’rs divine,  Whilst they a purer sacrifice design,Do but the Spleen obey, and worship at thy shrine.  In vain to chase thee ev’ry art we try,       In vain all remedies apply,       In vain the Indian leaf infuse,       Or the parched Eastern berry bruise;Some pass, in vain, those bounds, and nobler liquors use.       Now harmony, in vain, we bring,       Inspire the flute, and touch the string.       From harmony no help is had;Music but soothes thee, if too sweetly sad,And if too light, but turns thee gaily mad.       Though the physicians greatest gains,       Although his growing wealth he sees       Daily increased by ladies’ fees,  Yet dost thou baffle all his studious pains.       Not skillful Lower thy source could find,  Or through the well-dissected body trace       The secret, the mysterious ways,By which thou dost surprise, and prey upon the mind.Though in the search, too deep for humane thought,  With unsuccessful toil he wrought,’Till thinking thee to’ve catched, himself by thee was caught,  Retained thy pris’ner, thy acknowledged slave,And sunk beneath thy chain to a lamented grave.
***
Could our first father, at his toilsome plow,Thorns in his path, and labor on his brow,Clothed only in a rude, unpolished skin,Could he a vain fantastic nymph have seen,In all her airs, in all her antic graces,Her various fashions, and more various faces;How had it posed that skill, which late assignedJust appellations to each several kind!A right idea of the sight to frame;T’have guessed from what new element she came;T’have hit the wav’ring form, or giv’n this thing a name.
***
O King of terrors, whose unbounded swayAll that have life must certainly obey;The King, the Priest, the Prophet, all are thine,Nor would ev’n God (in flesh) thy stroke decline.My name is on thy roll, and sure I mustIncrease thy gloomy kingdom in the dust.My soul at this no apprehension feels,But trembles at thy swords, thy racks, thy wheels;Thy scorching fevers, which distract the sense,And snatch us raving, unprepared, from hence;At thy contagious darts, that wound the headsOf weeping friends, who wait at dying beds.Spare these, and let thy time be when it will;My bus’ness is to die, and thine to kill.Gently thy fatal scepter on me lay,And take to thy cold arms, insensibly, thy prey.
***
came in a pink, orange and white striped metal tube, with a black curlicue border and a splayed gold base.   It came in any number of mod shades: Nippy Beige, Chelsea Pink, Poppycock, Hot Nec- taringo, Pinkadilly, Dicey Peach.   There were several tubes in my mother’s makeup drawer in the bath- room five out of six of us used (my father had his own bathroom, as forbidden as the walk-in closet where his Playboys were hidden under a stack of sweaters on the top shelf).   All the girls at school had Slicker in their purses; I watched them apply The London Look at the beginning and end of each class.   I marveled at what else spilled out: compact, mascara brush, eye shadow, wallet, troll doll, dyed rabbit’s foot, chewing gum, tampon, pink plastic comb.   At home I stared at myself in the medicine cabinet mirror and, as my brother pounded on the locked bath- room door, twisted a tube and rubbed, ever so slightly, Slicker on my lips.
***
Pink Dawn, Aurora Pink, Misty Pink, Fresh Pink, Natural Pink, Country Pink, Dusty Pink, Pussywillow Pink, Pink Heather, Pink Peony, Sunflower Pink, Plum Pink, Peach of a Pink, Raspberry Pink, Watermelon Pink, Pink Lemonade, Bikini Pink, Buoy Buoy Pink, Sea Shell Pink, Pebble Pink, Pink Piper, Acapulco Pink, Tahiti Beach Pink, Sunny Pink, Hot Pink, Sizzling Pink, Skinnydip Pink, Flesh Pink, Transparent Pink, Breezy Pink, Sheer Shiver Pink, Polar Bare Pink, Pink Frost, Frosty Pink, Frost Me Pink, Frosted Pink, Sugarpuff Pink, Ice Cream Pink, Lickety Pink, Pink Melba, Pink Whip, Pinkermint, Sweet Young Pink, Little Girl Pink, Fragile Pink, Fainting Pink, Helpless Pink, Tiny Timid Pink, Wink of Pink, Shadow of Pink, Tint of Pink, Shimmer of Pink, Flicker of Pink, Pink Flash, E.S. Pink, Person-to-Person Pink, City Pink, Penny Lane Pink, Pink Paisley, London Luv Pink, Pretty Pink, Pastel Pink, Pinking Sheer, Pink Piqué, Pink Silk, Plush Pink, Lush Iced Pink, Brandied Pink, Sheer Pink Champagne, Candlelight Pink, Fluffy Moth Pink, Softsilver Pink, Pinkyring, Turn Pale Pink, A Little Pink, Pinker, Pinkety Pink, Heart of Pink, Hug that Pink, Passionate Pink, Snuggle Pink, Pink-Glo!, Happy-Go-Pink, Daredevil Pink, By Jupiter Pink, Stark Raving Pink, Viva La Pink.
***
His army jacket bore the white rectangle   of one who has torn off his name.  He sat mute   at the round table where the trip-wire veterans   ate breakfast.  They were foxhole buddies   who went stateside without leaving the war.   They had the look of men who held their breath   and now their tongues.  What is to say beyond that said by the fathers who bent lower   and lower as the war went on, spines curving   toward the ground on which sons sat sandbagged   with ammo belts enough to make fine lace   of enemy flesh and blood.  Now these who survived,    who got back in cargo planes emptied at the front, lived hiddenly in the woods behind fence wires   strung through tin cans.  Better an alarm   than the constant nightmare of something moving   on its belly to make your skin crawl   with the sensory memory of foxhole living.
***
Eph. What Friendship is, Ardelia show.Ard. ’Tis to love, as I love you.Eph. This account, so short (tho’ kind)     Suits not my inquiring mind.     Therefore farther now repeat:     What is Friendship when complete?Ard. ’Tis to share all joy and grief;     ’Tis to lend all due relief     From the tongue, the heart, the hand;     ’Tis to mortgage house and land;     For a friend be sold a slave;     ’Tis to die upon a grave,     If a friend therein do lie.Eph. This indeed, tho’ carried high,     This, tho’ more than e’er was done     Underneath the rolling sun,     This has all been said before.     Can Ardelia say no more?Ard. Words indeed no more can show:But ’tis to love, as I love you.
***
In such a night, when every louder windIs to its distant cavern safe confined;And only gentle Zephyr fans his wings,And lonely Philomel, still waking, sings;Or from some tree, famed for the owl’s delight,She, hollowing clear, directs the wand’rer right:In such a night, when passing clouds give place,Or thinly veil the heav’ns’ mysterious face;When in some river, overhung with green,The waving moon and the trembling leaves are seen;When freshened grass now bears itself upright,And makes cool banks to pleasing rest invite,Whence springs the woodbind, and the bramble-rose,And where the sleepy cowslip sheltered grows;Whilst now a paler hue the foxglove takes,Yet checkers still with red the dusky brakesWhen scatter’d glow-worms, but in twilight fine,Shew trivial beauties, watch their hour to shine;Whilst Salisb’ry stands the test of every light,In perfect charms, and perfect virtue bright:When odors, which declined repelling day,Through temp’rate air uninterrupted stray;When darkened groves their softest shadows wear,And falling waters we distinctly hear;When through the gloom more venerable showsSome ancient fabric, awful in repose,While sunburnt hills their swarthy looks conceal,And swelling haycocks thicken up the vale:When the loosed horse now, as his pasture leads,Comes slowly grazing through th’ adjoining meads,Whose stealing pace, and lengthened shade we fear,Till torn-up forage in his teeth we hear:When nibbling sheep at large pursue their food,And unmolested kine rechew the cud;When curlews cry beneath the village walls,And to her straggling brood the partridge calls;Their shortlived jubilee the creatures keep,Which but endures, whilst tyrant man does sleep;When a sedate content the spirit feels,And no fierce light disturbs, whilst it reveals;But silent musings urge the mind to seekSomething, too high for syllables to speak;Till the free soul to a composedness charmed,Finding the elements of rage disarmed,O’er all below a solemn quiet grown,Joys in th’ inferior world, and thinks it like her own:In such a night let me abroad remain,Till morning breaks, and all’s confused again;Our cares, our toils, our clamors are renewed,Or pleasures, seldom reached, again pursued.
***
Disarmed with so genteel an air,    The contest I give o’er; Yet, Alexander, have a care,    And shockshock Echoes the Shock from Pope's The Rape of the Lock where the word suggests a military campaign: "Or whether Heaven has doomed that Shock must fall. /. . . / Ariel himself shall be the guard of Shock." (Canto 2, lines 110, 116), and in Belinda's words from Canto 4, line 164: ". . . Shock was most unkind!" the sex no moreno more Finch echoes Pope's use of “no more” in "Impromptu": “In vain you boast Poetic Names of yore, / And cite those Sapphos we admire no more:“ and “Light to the Stars the Sun does thus restore, / But shines himself till they are seen no more.” . We rule the world our life’s whole race,    Men but assume that right; First slaves to ev’ry tempting faceFirst slaves to ev’ry tempting face Compare Pope's lines from The Rape of the Lock: "If to her share some female errors fall, / Look on her face, and you'll forget 'em all." (Canto 2, lines 17-18),    Then martyrs to our spite. You of one Orpheus Orpheus . . . Hebrus . . . flood  From Greek mythology: Orpheus was a legendary poet who could tame wild animals with his lute playing. He was allowed to lead his wife Eurydice out of Hades, provided he not look back as she followed him. Disobeying this command, he lost her forever. Afterward, lamenting his loss and disregarding the Thracian Maenads (women who followed Bacchus) these women tore him apart and threw his head into the Hebrus river. John Milton presents a brief account of Orpheus in Lycidas (1638), lines 58-63, which includes the river Hebrus: "His goary visage down the stream was sent, / Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore" (lines 62-63).  sure have read,    Who would like you have writ writ . . . wit Finch reverses the end rhyme of lines 3 and 4 from Pope's "Impromptu": “Fate doom'd the Fall of ev'ry Female Wit; / But doom'd it then when first Ardelia writ.” Had he in London town been bred,    And polished too his witwrit . . . wit Finch reverses the end rhyme of lines 3 and 4 from Pope's "Impromptu": “Fate doom'd the Fall of ev'ry Female Wit; / But doom'd it then when first Ardelia writ.”; But he poor soul thought all was well,    And great should be his fame, When he had left his wife in hell,    And birds and beasts could tame. Yet venturing then with scoffing rhymes    The women to incense, Resenting heroines of those times    Soon punished his offense. And as the Hebrus Orpheus . . . Hebrus . . . flood From Greek mythology: Orpheus was a legendary poet who could tame wild animals with his lute playing. He was allowed to lead his wife Eurydice out of Hades, provided he not look back as she followed him. Disobeying this command, he lost her forever. Afterward, lamenting his loss and disregarding the Thracian Maenads (women who followed Bacchus) these women tore him apart and threw his head into the Hebrus river. John Milton presents a brief account of Orpheus in Lycidas (1638), lines 58-63, which includes the river Hebrus: "His goary visage down the stream was sent, / Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore" (lines 62-63).  rolled his skull,    And harp besmeared with blood, They clashing as the waves grew full,    Still harmonized the flood Orpheus . . . Hebrus . . . flood From Greek mythology: Orpheus was a legendary poet who could tame wild animals with his lute playing. He was allowed to lead his wife Eurydice out of Hades, provided he not look back as she followed him. Disobeying this command, he lost her forever. Afterward, lamenting his loss and disregarding the Thracian Maenads (women who followed Bacchus) these women tore him apart and threw his head into the Hebrus river. John Milton presents a brief account of Orpheus in Lycidas (1638), lines 58-63, which includes the river Hebrus: "His goary visage down the stream was sent, / Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore" (lines 62-63). . But you our follies gently treat,    And spin so fine the thread, You need not fear his awkward fate,    The lock won’t cost the head The lock won’t cost the head  Refers to Pope's The Rape of the Lock, while also playing on "maidenhead": that is, virginity.. Our admirationadmiration Echoes Pope's "admire" from his "Impromptu": In vain you . . . / . . . cite those Sapphos we admire no more” you command    For all that’s gone before; What next we look for at your hand    Can only raise it more. Yet sooth the ladies I advise    (As me too pride has wrought) We’re born to wit, but to be wise    By admonitions taught.
***
In Aesop’s tales an honest wretch we find, Whose years and comforts equally declined; He in two wives had two domestic ills, For different age they had, and different wills; One plucked his black hairs out, and one his gray, The man for quietness did both obey, Till all his parish saw his head quite bare, And thought he wanted brains as well as hair.                         The Moral     The parties, henpecked William, are thy wives, The hairs they pluck are thy prerogatives; Tories thy person hate, the Whigs thy power, Though much thou yieldest, still they tug for more, Till this poor man and thou alike are shown, He without hair, and thou without a crown.
***
The merchant, to secure his treasure,  Conveys it in a borrowed name;Euphelia serves to grace my measure,  But Cloe is my real flame.My softest verse, my darling lyre,  Upon Euphelia’s toilet lay;When Cloe noted her desire  That I should sing, that I should play.My lyre I tune, my voice I raise,  But with my numbers mix my sighs;And whilst I sing Euphelia’s praise,  I fix my soul on Cloe’s eyes.Fair Cloe blushed; Euphelia frowned;  I sung and gazed; I played and trembled;And Venus to the Loves around  Remarked how ill we all dissembled.
***
Careful observers may foretell the hour (By sure prognostics) when to dread a shower: While rain depends, the pensive cat gives o’er Her frolics, and pursues her tail no more. Returning home at night, you’ll find the sink Strike your offended sense with double stink. If you be wise, then go not far to dine; You’ll spend in coach hire more than save in wine. A coming shower your shooting corns presage, Old achès throb, your hollow tooth will rage. Sauntering in coffeehouse is Dulman seen; He damns the climate and complains of spleen.          Meanwhile the South, rising with dabbled wings, A sable cloud athwart the welkin flings, That swilled more liquor than it could contain, And, like a drunkard, gives it up again. Brisk Susan whips her linen from the rope, While the first drizzling shower is born aslope: Such is that sprinkling which some careless quean Flirts on you from her mop, but not so clean: You fly, invoke the gods; then turning, stop To rail; she singing, still whirls on her mop. Not yet the dust had shunned the unequal strife, But, aided by the wind, fought still for life, And wafted with its foe by violent gust, ’Twas doubtful which was rain and which was dust. Ah! where must needy poet seek for aid, When dust and rain at once his coat invade? Sole coat, where dust cemented by the rain Erects the nap, and leaves a mingled stain.          Now in contiguous drops the flood comes down, Threatening with deluge this devoted town. To shops in crowds the daggled females fly, Pretend to cheapen goods, but nothing buy. The Templar spruce, while every spout’s abroach, Stays till ’tis fair, yet seems to call a coach. The tucked-up sempstress walks with hasty strides, While seams run down her oiled umbrella’s sides. Here various kinds, by various fortunes led, Commence acquaintance underneath a shed. Triumphant Tories and desponding Whigs Forget their feuds, and join to save their wigs. Boxed in a chair the beau impatient sits, While spouts run clattering o’er the roof by fits, And ever and anon with frightful din The leather sounds; he trembles from within. So when Troy chairmen bore the wooden steed, Pregnant with Greeks impatient to be freed (Those bully Greeks, who, as the moderns do, Instead of paying chairmen, run them through), Laocoön struck the outside with his spear, And each imprisoned hero quaked for fear.          Now from all parts the swelling kennels flow, And bear their trophies with them as they go: Filth of all hues and odors seem to tell What street they sailed from, by their sight and smell. They, as each torrent drives with rapid force, From Smithfield or St. Pulchre’s shape their course, And in huge confluence joined at Snow Hill ridge, Fall from the conduit prone to Holborn Bridge. Sweepings from butchers’ stalls, dung, guts, and blood, Drowned puppies, stinking sprats, all drenched in mud, Dead cats, and turnip tops, come tumbling down the flood.
***
Five hours, (and who can do it less in?) By haughty Celia spent in dressing; The goddess from her chamber issues, Arrayed in lace, brocades and tissues.          Strephon, who found the room was void, And Betty otherwise employed, Stole in, and took a strict survey, Of all the litter as it lay; Whereof, to make the matter clear, An inventory follows here.          And first a dirty smock appeared, Beneath the armpits well besmeared. Strephon, the rogue, displayed it wide, And turned it round on every side. On such a point few words are best, And Strephon bids us guess the rest, But swears how damnably the men lie, In calling Celia sweet and cleanly. Now listen while he next produces The various combs for various uses, Filled up with dirt so closely fixt, No brush could force a way betwixt. A paste of composition rare, Sweat, dandruff, powder, lead and hair; A forehead cloth with oil upon’t To smooth the wrinkles on her front; Here alum flower to stop the steams, Exhaled from sour unsavory streams, There night-gloves made of Tripsy’s hide, Bequeathed by Tripsy when she died, With puppy water, beauty’s help Distilled from Tripsy’s darling whelp; Here gallypots and vials placed, Some filled with washes, some with paste, Some with pomatum, paints and slops, And ointments good for scabby chops. Hard by a filthy basin stands, Fouled with the scouring of her hands; The basin takes whatever comes The scrapings of her teeth and gums, A nasty compound of all hues, For here she spits, and here she spews. But oh! it turned poor Strephon’s bowels, When he beheld and smelled the towels, Begummed, bemattered, and beslimed With dirt, and sweat, and earwax grimed. No object Strephon’s eye escapes, Here petticoats in frowzy heaps; Nor be the handkerchiefs forgot All varnished o’er with snuff and snot. The stockings why should I expose, Stained with the marks of stinking toes; Or greasy coifs and pinners reeking, Which Celia slept at least a week in? A pair of tweezers next he found To pluck her brows in arches round, Or hairs that sink the forehead low, Or on her chin like bristles grow.          The virtues we must not let pass, Of Celia’s magnifying glass. When frightened Strephon cast his eye on’t It showed visage of a giant. A glass that can to sight disclose, The smallest worm in Celia’s nose, And faithfully direct her nail To squeeze it out from head to tail; For catch it nicely by the head, It must come out alive or dead.          Why Strephon will you tell the rest? And must you needs describe the chest? That careless wench! no creature warn her To move it out from yonder corner; But leave it standing full in sight For you to exercise your spite. In vain the workman showed his wit With rings and hinges counterfeit To make it seem in this disguise A cabinet to vulgar eyes; For Strephon ventured to look in, Resolved to go through thick and thin; He lifts the lid, there needs no more, He smelled it all the time before. As from within Pandora’s box, When Epimetheus op’d the locks, A sudden universal crew Of human evils upwards flew; He still was comforted to find That Hope at last remained behind; So Strephon lifting up the lid, To view what in the chest was hid. The vapors flew from out the vent, But Strephon cautious never meant The bottom of the pan to grope, And foul his hands in search of Hope. O never may such vile machine Be once in Celia’s chamber seen! O may she better learn to keep Those “secrets of the hoary deep!”          As mutton cutlets, prime of meat, Which though with art you salt and beat As laws of cookery require, And toast them at the clearest fire; If from adown the hopeful chops The fat upon a cinder drops, To stinking smoke it turns the flame Pois’ning the flesh from whence it came, And up exhales a greasy stench, For which you curse the careless wench; So things, which must not be expressed, When plumped into the reeking chest, Send up an excremental smell To taint the parts from whence they fell. The petticoats and gown perfume, Which waft a stink round every room. Thus finishing his grand survey, Disgusted Strephon stole away Repeating in his amorous fits, Oh! Celia, Celia, Celia shits!          But Vengeance, goddess never sleeping Soon punished Strephon for his peeping; His foul imagination links Each Dame he sees with all her stinks: And, if unsavory odors fly, Conceives a lady standing by: All women his description fits, And both ideas jump like wits: But vicious fancy coupled fast, And still appearing in contrast. I pity wretched Strephon blind To all the charms of female kind; Should I the queen of love refuse, Because she rose from stinking ooze? To him that looks behind the scene, Satira’s but some pocky queen. When Celia in her glory shows, If Strephon would but stop his nose (Who now so impiously blasphemes Her ointments, daubs, and paints and creams, Her washes, slops, and every clout, With which he makes so foul a rout) He soon would learn to think like me, And bless his ravished sight to see Such order from confusion sprung, Such gaudy tulips raised from dung.
***
Corinna, pride of Drury-Lane For whom no shepherd sighs in vain; Never did Covent Garden boast So bright a battered, strolling toast; No drunken rake to pick her up, No cellar where on tick to sup; Returning at the midnight hour; Four stories climbing to her bow’r; Then, seated on a three-legged chair, Takes off her artificial hair: Now, picking out a crystal eye, She wipes it clean, and lays it by. Her eye-brows from a mouse’s hide, Stuck on with art on either side, Pulls off with care, and first displays ’em, Then in a play-book smoothly lays ’em. Now dexterously her plumpers draws, That serve to fill her hollow jaws. Untwists a wire; and from her gums A set of teeth completely comes. Pulls out the rags contrived to prop Her flabby dugs and down they drop. Proceeding on, the lovely goddess Unlaces next her steel-ribbed bodice; Which by the operator’s skill, Press down the lumps, the hollows fill, Up goes her hand, and off she slips The bolsters that supply her hips. With gentlest touch, she next explores Her shankers, issues, running sores, Effects of many a sad disaster; And then to each applies a plaister. But must, before she goes to bed, Rub off the dawbs of white and red; And smooth the furrows in her front With greasy paper stuck upon’t. She takes a bolus ere she sleeps; And then between two blankets creeps. With pains of love tormented lies; Or if she chance to close her eyes, Of Bridewell and the Compter dreams, And feels the lash, and faintly screams; Or, by a faithless bully drawn, At some hedge-tavern lies in pawn; Or to Jamaica seems transported, Alone, and by no planter courted; Or, near Fleet-Ditch’s oozy brinks, Surrounded with a hundred stinks, Belated, seems on watch to lie, And snap some cully passing by; Or, struck with fear, her fancy runs On watchmen, constables and duns, From whom she meets with frequent rubs; But, never from religious clubs; Whose favor she is sure to find, Because she pays ’em all in kind.          Corinna wakes. A dreadful sight! Behold the ruins of the night! A wicked rat her plaster stole, Half eat, and dragged it to his hole. The crystal eye, alas, was missed; And puss had on her plumpers pissed. A pigeon picked her issue-peas; And Shock her tresses filled with fleas.          The nymph, tho’ in this mangled plight, Must ev’ry morn her limbs unite. But how shall I describe her arts To recollect the scattered parts? Or shew the anguish, toil, and pain, Of gath’ring up herself again? The bashful muse will never bear In such a scene to interfere. Corinna in the morning dizened, Who sees, will spew; who smells, be poison’d.
***
When the fierce north wind with his airy forces Rears up the Baltic to a foaming fury, And the red lightning with a storm of hail comes                                Rushing amain down, How the poor sailors stand amazed and tremble, While the hoarse thunder, like a bloody trumpet, Roars a loud onset to the gaping waters,                                Quick to devour them! Such shall the noise be and the wild disorder, (If things eternal may be like these earthly) Such the dire terror, when the great Archangel                                Shakes the creation, Tears the strong pillars of the vault of heaven, Breaks up old marble, the repose of princes; See the graves open, and the bones arising,                                Flames all around ’em! Hark, the shrill outcries of the guilty wretches! Lively bright horror and amazing anguish Stare through their eyelids, while the living worm lies                                Gnawing within them. Thoughts like old vultures prey upon their heart-strings, And the smart twinges, when the eye beholds the Lofty Judge frowning, and a flood of vengeance                                Rolling afore him. Hopeless immortals! how they scream and shiver, While devils push them to the pit wide-yawning Hideous and gloomy, to receive them headlong                            Down to the center. Stop here, my fancy: (all away ye horrid Doleful ideas); come, arise to Jesus; How He sits God-like! and the saints around him                                Throned, yet adoring! Oh may I sit there when he comes triumphant Dooming the nations! then ascend to glory While our hosannas all along the passage                                Shout the Redeemer.
***
There is a land of pure delight    Where saints immortal reign; Infinite day excludes the night,    And pleasures banish pain. There everlasting spring abides,    And never-withering flowers; Death like a narrow sea divides    This heavenly land from ours. Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood    Stand dressed in living green: So to the Jews old Canaan stood,    While Jordan rolled between. But timorous mortals start and shrink    To cross this narrow sea, And linger shivering on the brink,    And fear to launch away. Oh could we make our doubts remove,    These gloomy doubts that rise, And see the Canaan that we love,    With unbeclouded eyes; Could we but climb where Moses stood    And view the landscape o’er, Not Jordan’s stream, nor death’s cold flood,    Should fright us from the shore.
***
Our God, our help in ages past,    Our hope for years to come, Our shelter from the stormy blast,    And our eternal home: Under the shadow of thy throne    Thy saints have dwelt secure; Sufficient is thine arm alone,    And our defense is sure. Before the hills in order stood    Or earth received her frame, From everlasting thou art God,    To endless years the same. Thy word commands our flesh to dust,    “Return, ye sons of men”; All nations rose from earth at first,    And turn to earth again. A thousand ages in thy sight    Are like an evening gone; Short as the watch that ends the night    Before the rising sun. The busy tribes of flesh and blood,    With all their lives and cares, Are carried downwards by thy flood,    And lost in following years. Time, like an ever-rolling stream,    Bears all its sons away; They fly forgotten, as a dream    Dies at the opening day. Like flowery fields the nations stand,    Pleased with the morning light; The flowers beneath the mower’s hand    Lie withering e’er ’tis night. Our God, our help in ages past,    Our hope for years to come, Be thou our guard while troubles last,    And our eternal home.
***
Judges, who rule the world by laws, Will ye despise the righteous cause,    When th’injur’d poor before you stands? Dare ye condemn the righteous poor, And let rich sinners ’scape secure,    While gold and greatness bribe your hands? Have ye forgot or never knew That God will judge the judges too?    High in the Heavens his justice reigns; Yet you invade the rights of God, And send your bold decrees abroad    To bind the conscience in your chains. A poisoned arrow is your tongue, The arrow sharp, the poison strong,    And death attends where e’er it wounds: You hear no counsels, cries or tears; So the deaf adder stops her ears    Against the power of charming sounds. Break out their teeth, eternal God, Those teeth of lions dyed in blood;    And crush the serpents in the dust: As empty chaff, when whirlwinds rise, Before the sweeping tempest flies,    So let their hopes and names be lost. Th’Almighty thunders from the sky, Their grandeur melts, their titles die,    As hills of snow dissolve and run, Or snails that perish in their slime, Or births that come before their time,    Vain births, that never see the sun. Thus shall the vengeance of the Lord Safety and joy to saints afford;    And all that hear shall join and say, “Sure there’s a God that rules on high, “A God that hears his children cry,    “And will their sufferings well repay.”
***
When Isr’el, freed from Pharaoh’s hand, Left the proud tyrant and his land, The tribes with cheerful homage own Their king; and Judah was his throne. Across the deep their journey lay; The deep divides to make them way. Jordan beheld their march, and led, With backward current, to his head. The mountains shook like frighted sheep, Like lambs the little hillocks leap; Not Sinai on her base could stand, Conscious of sov’reign pow’r at hand. What pow’r could make the deep divide? Make Jordan backward roll his tide? Why did ye leap, ye little hills? And whence the fright that Sinai feels? Let ev’ry mountain, ev’ry flood, Retire and know th’ approaching God, The King of Isr’el: see him here! Tremble, thou earth, adore and fear. He thunders, and all nature mourns; The rock to standing pools he turns, Flints spring with fountains at his word, And fires and seas confess the Lord.
***
Polly.       I like a ship in storms was tossed,                Yet afraid to put into land,             For seized in the port the vessel’s lost                Whose treasure is contraband.                  The waves are laid,                  My duty’s paid;                O joy beyond expression!                  Thus safe ashore                  I ask no more;                My all is in my possession.
***
Mac.   Were I laid on Greenland’s coast,          And in my arms embraced my lass,       Warm amidst eternal frost,          Too soon the half-year’s night would pass.Polly. Were I sold on Indian soil,          Soon as the burning day was closed,       I could mock the sultry toil          When on my charmer’s breast reposed.Mac.   And I would love you all the day,Polly. Every night would kiss and play,Mac.   If with me you’d fondly strayPolly. Over the hills, and far away.
***
Youth’s the season made for joys,              Love is then our duty:        She alone who that employs,              Well deserves her beauty.                    Let’s be gay                    While we may,        Beauty’s a flower despised in decay.Chorus.      Youth’s the season, etc.        Let us drink and sport to-day,              Ours is not to-morrow:        Love with youth flies swift away,              Age is naught but sorrow.                    Dance and sing,                    Time’s on the wing,        Life never knows the return the spring.Chorus.      Let us drink, etc.
***
Since laws were made, for every degree,To curb vice in others, as well as me,I wonder we han’t better company      Upon Tyburn tree.But gold from law can take out the sting;And if rich men, like us, were to swing,’Twould thin the land, such numbers to string      Upon Tyburn tree.
***
They explained to me the bloody bandages On the floor in the maternity ward in Rochester, N.Y.,   Cured the backache I acquired bowing to my old master,   Made me stop putting thumbtacks round my bed. They showed me an officer on horseback, Waving a saber next to a burning farmhouse   And a barefoot woman in a nightgown, Throwing stones after him and calling him Lucifer. I was a straw-headed boy in patched overalls.   Come dark a chicken would roost in my hair.   Some even laid eggs as I played my ukulele   And my mother and father crossed themselves. Next, I saw myself inside an abandoned gas station   Constructing a spaceship out of a coffin, Red traffic cone, cement mixer and ear warmers, When a church lady fainted seeing me in my underwear. Some days, however, they opened door after door,   Always to a different room, and could not find me.   There’d be only a small squeak now and then,   As if a miner’s canary got caught in a mousetrap.
***
Father of all! in every age,     In every clime adored, By saint, by savage, and by sage,     Jehovah, Jove, or Lord! Thou Great First Cause, least understood:     Who all my sense confined To know but this—that thou art good,     And that myself am blind: Yet gave me, in this dark estate,     To see the good from ill; And binding Nature fast in fate,     Left free the human will. What conscience dictates to be done,     Or warns me not to do, This, teach me more than Hell to shun,     That, more than Heaven pursue. What blessings thy free bounty gives,     Let me not cast away; For God is paid when man receives,     To enjoy is to obey. Yet not to earth’s contracted span,     Thy goodness let me bound, Or think thee Lord alone of man,     When thousand worlds are round: Let not this weak, unknowing hand     Presume thy bolts to throw, And deal damnation round the land,     On each I judge thy foe. If I am right, thy grace impart,     Still in the right to stay; If I am wrong, oh teach my heart     To find a better way. Save me alike from foolish pride,     Or impious discontent, At aught thy wisdom has denied,     Or aught thy goodness lent. Teach me to feel another’s woe,     To hide the fault I see; That mercy I to others show,     That mercy show to me. Mean though I am, not wholly so     Since quickened by thy breath; Oh lead me wheresoe’er I go,     Through this day’s life or death. This day, be bread and peace my lot:     All else beneath the sun, Thou know’st if best bestowed or not,     And let thy will be done. To thee, whose temple is all space,     Whose altar, earth, sea, skies! One chorus let all being raise!     All Nature’s incense rise!
***
In vain you boast poetic names of yore, And cite those Sapphos we admire no more: Fate doomed the fall of every female wit; But doomed it then, when first Ardelia writ. Of all examples by the world confessed, I knew Ardelia could not quote the best; Who, like her mistress on Britannia’s throne, Fights and subdues in quarrels not her own. To write their praise you but in vain essay; Even while you write, you take that praise away. Light to the stars the sun does thus restore, But shines himself till they are seen no more. 
***
I Why will Delia thus retire,    And idly languish life away? While the sighing crowd admire,    ’Tis too soon for hartshorn tea:                   II   All those dismal looks and fretting    Cannot Damon’s life restore; Long ago the worms have eat him,    You can never see him more.                   III Once again consult your toilette,    In the glass your face review: So much weeping soon will spoil it,    And no spring your charms renew.                   IV I, like you, was born a woman,    Well I know what vapors mean: The disease, alas! is common;    Single, we have all the spleen.                   V All the morals that they tell us,    Never cured the sorrow yet: Chuse, among the pretty fellows,    One of honor, youth, and wit.                   VI Prithee hear him every morning    At least an hour or two; Once again at night returning—    I believe the dose will do.
***
Think not this paper comes with vain pretenseTo move your pity, or to mourn th’ offense.Too well I know that hard obdurate heart;No softening mercy there will take my part,Nor can a woman’s arguments prevail,When even your patron’s wise example fails.But this last privilege I still retain;Th’ oppressed and injured always may complain.   Too, too severely laws of honor bindThe weak submissive sex of womankind.If sighs have gained or force compelled our hand,Deceived by art, or urged by stern command,Whatever motive binds the fatal tie,The judging world expects our constancy.   Just heaven! (for sure in heaven does justice reign,Though tricks below that sacred name profane)To you appealing I submit my cause.Nor fear a judgment from impartial laws.All bargains but conditional are made;The purchase void, the creditor unpaid;Defrauded servants are from service free;A wounded slave regains his liberty.For wives ill used no remedy remains,To daily racks condemned, and to eternal chains.   From whence is this unjust distinction grown?Are we not formed with passions like your own?Nature with equal fire our souls endued,Our minds as haughty, and as warm our blood;O’er the wide world your pleasures you pursue,The change is justified by something new;But we must sigh in silence—and be true.Our sex’s weakness you expose and blame(Of every prattling fop the common theme),Yet from this weakness you suppose is dueSublimer virtue than your Cato knew.Had heaven designed us trials so severe,It would have formed our tempers then to bear.   And I have borne (oh what have I not borne!)The pang of jealousy, the insults of scorn.Wearied at length, I from your sight remove,And place my future hopes in secret love.In the gay bloom of glowing youth retired,I quit the woman’s joy to be admired,With that small pension your hard heart allows,Renounce your fortune, and release your vows.To custom (though unjust) so much is due;I hide my frailty from the public view.My conscience clear, yet sensible of shame,My life I hazard, to preserve my fame.And I prefer this low inglorious stateTo vile dependence on the thing I hate—But you pursue me to this last retreat.Dragged into light, my tender crime is shownAnd every circumstance of fondness known.Beneath the shelter of the law you stand,And urge my ruin with a cruel hand,While to my fault thus rigidly severe,Tamely submissive to the man you fear.   This wretched outcast, this abandoned wife,Has yet this joy to sweeten shameful life:By your mean conduct, infamously loose,You are at once my accuser and excuse.Let me be damned by the censorious prude(Stupidly dull, or spiritually lewd),My hapless case will surely pity findFrom every just and reasonable mind.When to the final sentence I submit,The lips condemn me, but their souls aquit.   No more my husband, to your pleasures go,The sweets of your recovered freedom know.Go: court the brittle friendship of the great,Smile at his board, or at his levee wait;And when dismissed, to madam’s toilet fly,More than her chambermaids, or glasses, lie,Tell her how young she looks, how heavenly fair,Admire the lilies and the roses there.Your high ambition may be gratified,Some cousin of her own be made your bride,And you the father of a glorious raceEndowed with Ch——l’s strength and Low——r’s face.
***
1 My God! I know, I feel thee mine,    And will not quit my claim Till all I have is lost in thine,    And all renewed I am.                         2 I hold thee with a trembling hand,    But will not let thee go Till steadfastly by faith I stand,    And all thy goodness know.                         3 When shall I see the welcome hour    That plants my God in me! Spirit of health, and life, and power,    And perfect liberty!                         4 Jesu, thine all-victorious love    Shed in my heart abroad! Then shall my feet no longer rove,    Rooted and fixed in God.                         5 Love only can the conquest win,    The strength of sin subdue (Mine own unconquerable sin),    And form my soul anew.                         6 Love can bow down the stubborn neck,    The stone to flesh convert; Soften, and melt, and pierce, and break    An adamantine heart.                         7 Oh, that in me the sacred fire    Might now begin to glow, Burn up the dross of base desire,    And make the mountains flow!                         8 Oh, that it now from heaven might fall,    And all my sins consume! Come, Holy Ghost, for thee I call,    Spirit of burning, come!                         9 Refining fire, go through my heart,    Illuminate my soul; Scatter thy life through every part,    And sanctify the whole.                         10 Sorrow and sin shall then expire,    While, entered into rest, I only live my God t’admire—    My God forever blest.                         11 No longer then my heart shall mourn,    While purified by grace I only for his glory burn,    And always see his face.                         12 My steadfast soul, from falling free,    Shall then no longer move; But Christ be all the world to me,    And all my heart be love.
***
1 Come on, my partners in distress, My comrades through the wilderness,    Who still your bodies feel; Awhile forget your griefs and fears, And look beyond this vale of tears    To that celestial hill.                               2 Beyond the bounds of time and space Look forward to that heavenly place,    The saints’ secure abode; On faith’s strong eagle pinions rise, And force your passage to the skies,    And scale the mount of God.                               3 Who suffer with our Master here, We shall before his face appear,    And by his side sit down; To patient faith the prize is sure, And all that to the end endure    The cross, shall wear the crown.                               4 Thrice blessed bliss-inspiring hope! It lifts the fainting spirits up,    It brings to life the dead; Our conflicts here shall soon be past, And you and I ascend at last    Triumphant with our head.                               5 The great mysterious Deity We soon with open face shall see;    The beatific sight Shall fill heaven’s sounding courts with praise, And wide diffuse the golden blaze    Of everlasting light.                               6 The Father shining on his throne, The glorious, co-eternal Son,    The Spirit, one and seven, Conspire our rapture to complete, And lo! we fall before his feet,    And silence heightens heaven.                               7 In hope of that ecstatic pause, Jesu, we now sustain the cross,    And at thy footstool fall, Till thou our hidden life reveal, Till thou our ravished spirits fill,    And God is all in all.
***
So it is here, then, after so long, and after all— as the light turns in the leaves in the old golden  way of fall,                    as the small beasts dig to the place at the roots where survival waits, cowardly crouching  in the dark,                    as the branches begin to stretch into winter,  freed of their cheerful burden of green, then       it comes home, the flea-ridden bitch of desolation,  a thin dog with its ribs exposed like a lesson in mathematics, in subtraction; it comes home, to find its bowl  empty—then the numberless things for which to be grateful dissolve like the steam from a fire just doused with water on a day of overcast grays, lined by a cold slanting rain—                                      it is October, that season when Death  goes public, costumed, when the talking heads on the TV screen float up smiling at the terrible news, their skin alight with the same strange glow fish give off when they have been dead a week or more,  as the gas company adds odor for warning that the lines may be leaking, the sweet smell of disaster  hanging, invisible, in the air, a moment before you strike the match— it is then, brother, that I think of you, of your Caravaggio,  of the head of Goliath swung by its hair, wearing the artist’s own weary expression, exhausted of everything but its desire for that beautiful David he used to be; and I think  of all the boys walking the streets each carrying the severed head of the man he will become—and the way I bear it is to think of you, grinning, riding high in the cart leaving  the scene, a pair of huge horses hauling the wagon,  a fine mist rising from their damp shoulders,  unconcerned with what hangs, nailed to the museum walls—luckily the fall of Icarus has nothing to do with them,  nor the ruined Goliath who fell like a forest, nor the wretched Salomes with their blood-splattered  platters, nor the huge stone griffins sobbing at the gates to Valhalla as the litters are carried past ... the dark eyes of the horses are opaque with wisdom, their hoofs strike the pavements with such a musical decision,  the derisive curl of their lips is so like the mysterious  smile on the angel at Chartres, on Kuan Yin, on the dolphin,  as they pull the cart safe through the blizzards  of Main Street, the snow slowly swallowing the signs  though the crossing light beckons— a soft glowing green like some spectral Eden  in the blank white swirl of the storm. The stallion neighs once, sends a warm cloud  of breath into the snow-filled air, and the mare isn’t scared yet—at least  she’s still pulling. There’s a barn out there  somewhere, as they plow through the light’s  yellow aura of caution, its warm glow foretelling what hides in the storm: a stall full of gold, where the soul— that magician—can wallow and winter in straw.
***
The messenger runs, not carrying the news  of victory, or defeat; the messenger, unresting,    has always been running, the wind before and behind him,     across the turning back of earth, leaving       his tracks across the plains, his ropes        hanging from the ledges of mountains;          for centuries, millennia, he has been running        carrying whatever it is that cannot be       put down: it is rolled in a tube     made of hide, carefully, to keep it dry    as he runs, through storms and monsoons, sometimes on foot, sometimes poling a boat   through a flooded mangrove swamp, or     setting stiff sails to cross from island to island     running before the wind. In some ages, peasants       have helped him—bringing him small cakes        of rice wrapped in the weeds of the sea and          new sandals woven of hemp for his torn        bleeding feet; sometimes in the heat of noon       they would offer a drink of rosewater, sometimes    a coat of fur against the winter snows;  and sometimes at night, he would rest  by a fire where voices wove with the music    of gut-strings, or with mountain pipes whose     sound was like wind through the bones       of creation—and he would be cheered        by the company of others, the firelit glow          of their faces like a bright raft afloat in the dark;        at times, rumors spread of his death, scholars       analyzed his obsession, dated his bones, his prayer bundle;    but at dawn, he always arose, in the mists, in the blur of so many mornings, so many shoes  worn into scraps and discarded, so many     the cities that burned as he passed     them, so many the skulls abandoned       by armies, so many whose blood        stained the threads of their prayer rugs,           so many, so many, so many—       oh,     and that green, sunlit hill that kept    rising from the dark waters of flood, outlined bright   against the sky, the odds, the evidence— and he, the messenger,  running through history, carries this small tube,    its durable hide—carries it, not like      a torch, no, nothing so blazing;       not like the brass lamp that summons        a genie, no magic wishes;       not like the candles that hope sets aflame     and a breath can extinguish ... no.  He carried it like    what has no likeness,     what is curled up inside and       he swore he could feel it, though        perhaps he had dreamed it, still          at times, stopping under some tree        or other, when the night was warm,       so close the stars seemed to breathe in     the branches, he would lie quiet,   then it would seem that whatever it was in there  would pulse softly with light, a code     only the heart could break     (but of course he couldn’t say       for he was only the messenger)—     and at sunrise, wearily, he would rise        to his feet and trudge on, sometimes         running, sometimes stumbling,          carrying whatever it was that could not           be put down, would not be cast aside—          and besides, he would chide himself,         weren’t they all as tired as he,       and hadn’t they helped him, time     and again, on his way?
***
All around the altar, huge lianas curled, unfurled the dark green of their leaves to complement the red of blood spilled there—a kind of Christmas  decoration, overhung with heavy vines and over them, the stars. When the angels came, messengers like birds  but with the oiled flesh of men, they hung  over the scene with smoldering swords,  splashing the world when they beat their rain-soaked wings against the turning sky. The child was bright in his basket as a lemon, with a bitter smell from his wet  swaddling clothes. His mother bent  above him, singing a lullaby in the liquid tongue invented for the very young—short syllables  like dripping from an eave mixed with the first big drops of rain  that fell, like tiny silver pears, from the glistening fronds of palm. The three  who gathered there—old kings uncrowned:  the cockroach, condor, and the leopard, lords of the cracks below the ground, the mountain  pass and the grass-grown plain—were not  adorned, did not bear gifts, had not  come to adore; they were simply drawn  to gawk at this recurrent, awkward son  whom the wind had said would spell  the end of earth as it had been. Somewhere north of this familiar scene  the polar caps were melting, the water was  advancing in its slow, relentless lines, swallowing the old landmarks, swelling the seas that pulled the flowers and the great steel cities down.  The dolphins sport in the rising sea,  anemones wave their many arms like hair  on a drowned gorgon’s head, her features  softened by the sea beyond all recognition. On the desert’s edge where the oasis dies in a wash of sand, the sphinx seems to shift on her haunches of stone, and the rain, as it runs down,  completes the ruin of her face. The Nile merges with the sea, the waters rise and drown the noise of earth. At the forest’s edge, where the child sleeps, the waters gather— as if a hand were reaching for the curtain to drop across the glowing, lit tableau. When the waves closed over, completing the green  sweep of ocean, there was no time for mourning.  No final trump, no thunder to announce the silent steal of waters; how soundlessly it all went under: the little family and the scene so easily mistaken for an adoration. Above, more clouds poured in  and closed their ranks across the skies; the angels, who had seemed so solid, turned  quicksilver in the rain.                                      Now, nothing but the wind  moves on the rain-pocked face of the swollen waters, though far below where giant squid lie hidden in shy tangles,  the whales, heavy-bodied as the angels,  their fins like vestiges of wings, sing some mighty epic of their own— a great day when the ships would all withdraw,  the harpoons fail of their aim, the land  dissolve into the waters, and they would swim  among the peaks of mountains, like eagles  of the deep, while far below them, the old  nightmares of earth would settle into silt among the broken cities, the empty  basket of the child would float abandoned in the seaweed until the work of water  unraveled it in filaments of straw, till even that straw rotted in the planetary thaw the whales prayed for,  sending their jets of water skyward  in the clear conviction they’d spill back  to ocean with their will accomplished  in the miracle of rain: And the earth  was without form and void, and darkness  was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit moved upon the face of the waters.***
Condemned to Hope’s delusive mine,     As on we toil from day to day, By sudden blasts, or slow decline,     Our social comforts drop away. Well tried through many a varying year,     See Levet to the grave descend; Officious, innocent, sincere,     Of every friendless name the friend. Yet still he fills Affection’s eye,     Obscurely wise, and coarsely kind; Nor, lettered Arrogance, deny     Thy praise to merit unrefined. When fainting Nature called for aid,     And hovering Death prepared the blow, His vigorous remedy displayed     The power of art without the show. In Misery’s darkest cavern known,     His useful care was ever nigh, Where hopeless Anguish poured his groan,     And lonely Want retired to die. No summons mocked by chill delay,     No petty gain disdained by pride, The modest wants of every day     The toil of every day supplied. His virtues walked their narrow round,     Nor made a pause, nor left a void; And sure the Eternal Master found     The single talent well employed. The busy day, the peaceful night,     Unfelt, uncounted, glided by; His frame was firm, his powers were bright,     Though now his eightieth year was nigh. Then with no throbbing fiery pain,     No cold gradations of decay, Death broke at once the vital chain,     And freed his soul the nearest way.
***
Ye congregation of the tribes,     On justice do you set your mind; And are ye free from guile and bribes    Ye judges of mankind? Nay, ye of frail and mortal mould    Imagine mischief in your heart; Your suffrages and selves are sold    Unto the general mart. Men of unrighteous seed betray    Perverseness from their mother’s womb; As soon as they can run astray,    Against the truth presume. They are with foul infection stained,    Ev’n with the serpent’s taint impure; Their ears to blest persuasion chained,    And locked against her lure. Though Christ himself the pipe should tune,    They will not to the measure tread, Nor will they with his grief commune    Though tears of blood he shed. Lord, humanize their scoff and scorn,    And their malevolence defeat; Of water and the spirit born    Let grace their change complete. Let them with pious ardor burn,    And make thy holy church their choice; To thee with all their passions turn,    And in thy light rejoice. As quick as lightning to its mark,    So let thy gracious angel speed; And take their spirits in thine ark    To their eternal mead. The righteous shall exult the more    As he such powerful mercy sees, Such wrecks and ruins safe on shore,    Such tortured souls at ease. So that a man shall say, no doubt,    The penitent has his reward; There is a God to bear him out,    And he is Christ our Lord.
***
When Israel came from Egypt’s coast,    And Goshen’s marshy plains, And Jacob with his joyful host    From servitude and chains; Then was it seen how much the Jews    Were holy in his sight, And God did Israel’s kingdom choose    To manifest his might. The sea beheld it, and with dread    Retreated to make way; And Jordan to his fountain head    Ran backwards in dismay. The mountains, like the rams that bound,    Exulted on their base; Like lambs the little hills around    Skipt lightly from their place. What is the cause, thou mighty sea,    That thou thyself should shun; And Jordan, what is come to thee,    That thou should backward run? Ye mountains that ye leaped so high    From off the solid rock, Ye hills that ye should gambols try,    Like firstlings of the flock? Earth, from the center to the sod    His fearful presence hail The presence of Jeshurun’s God,    In whom our arms prevail. Who beds of rocks in pools to stand    Can by his word compel, And from the veiny flint command    The fountain and the well.
***
Here lies, whom hound did ne’er pursue,     Nor swifter greyhound follow, Whose foot ne’er tainted morning dew,     Nor ear heard huntsman’s hallo’, Old Tiney, surliest of his kind,     Who, nursed with tender care, And to domesticate bounds confined,     Was still a wild jack-hare. Though duly from my hand he took     His pittance every night, He did it with a jealous look,     And, when he could, would bite. His diet was of wheaten bread,     And milk, and oats, and straw, Thistles, or lettuces instead,     With sand to scour his maw. On twigs of hawthorn he regaled,     On pippins’ russet peel; And, when his juicy salads failed,     Sliced carrot pleased him well. A Turkey carpet was his lawn,     Whereon he loved to bound, To skip and gambol like a fawn,     And swing his rump around. His frisking was at evening hours,     For then he lost his fear; But most before approaching showers,     Or when a storm drew near. Eight years and five round-rolling moons     He thus saw steal away, Dozing out all his idle noons,     And every night at play. I kept him for his humor’s sake,     For he would oft beguile My heart of thoughts that made it ache,     And force me to a smile. But now, beneath this walnut-shade     He finds his long, last home, And waits in snug concealment laid,     Till gentler Puss shall come. He, still more agèd, feels the shocks     From which no care can save, And, partner once of Tiney’s box,     Must soon partake his grave.
***
Here, in our familiar streets, the day  is brisk with winter’s business. The reassuring rows of brick façades,  litter baskets overflowing with the harvest of the streets and, when the light turns, the people  move in unison, the cars miraculously  slide to a stop, no one is killed,  the streets, for some reason, do not  show the blood that is pouring  like a tide, on other shores.          Martinez, the last peasant left alive           in his village, refuses to run, hopes           that God, El Salvador,          will let him get the harvest in.          “Can a fish live out of water?” he says           for why he stays, and weeds          another row, ignoring the fins           of sharks that push up          through the furrows. Here, it is said, we live in the belly of the beast. Ahab sits forever at the helm, his skin white wax, an effigy. The whale carries  him, lashed to its side by the ropes from his own harpoon. His eyes are dead. His ivory leg juts from the flank of Leviathan like a useless tooth.          One more time, the distant sail appears,           a cloud forms, an old icon for mercy           turned up in a dusty corner          of the sky, preparing rain          for the parched land, Rachel          weeping for her children. “Can a fish           live out of water?” he asks          and the rain answers, in Spanish,           manitas de plata          little hands of silver on his brow.
***
Hatred and vengeance, my eternal portion, Scarce can endure delay of execution, Wait, with impatient readiness, to seize my                            Soul in a moment. Damned below Judas: more abhorred than he was, Who for a few pence sold his holy master. Twice betrayed, Jesus me, the last delinquent,                            Deems the profanest. Man disavows, and Deity disowns me: Hell might afford my miseries a shelter; Therefore hell keeps her ever-hungry mouths all                            Bolted against me. Hard lot! encompassed with a thousand dangers; Weary, faint, trembling with a thousand terrors, I’m called, if vanquished, to receive a sentence                            Worse than Abiram’s. Him the vindictive rod of angry justice Sent quick and howling to the centre headlong; I, fed with judgment, in a fleshly tomb, am                            Buried above ground.
***
Child of distress, who meet’st the bitter scorn Of fellow-men to happier prospects born, Doomed Art and Nature’s various stores to see Flow in full cups of joy—and not for thee; Who seest the rich, to heaven and fate resigned, Bear thy afflictions with a patient mind; Whose bursting heart disdains unjust control, Who feel’st oppression’s iron in thy soul, Who dragg’st the load of faint and feeble years, Whose bread is anguish, and whose water tears; Bear, bear thy wrongs—fulfill thy destined hour, Bend thy meek neck beneath the foot of Power; But when thou feel’st the great deliverer nigh, And thy freed spirit mounting seeks the sky, Let no vain fears thy parting hour molest, No whispered terrors shake thy quiet breast: Think not their threats can work thy future woe, Nor deem the Lord above like lords below;— Safe in the bosom of that love repose By whom the sun gives light, the ocean flows; Prepare to meet a Father undismayed, Nor fear the God whom priests and kings have made. 
***
Life! I know not what thou art,    But know that thou and I must part;    And when, or how, or where we met,    I own to me’s a secret yet.    But this I know, when thou art fled,    Where’er they lay these limbs, this head,    No clod so valueless shall be,    As all that then remains of me.    O whither, whither dost thou fly,    Where bend unseen thy trackless course,       And in this strange divorce, Ah tell where I must seek this compound I? To the vast ocean of empyreal flame,       From whence thy essence came,       Dost thou thy flight pursue, when freed       From matter’s base encumbering weed?          Or dost thou, hid from sight,          Wait, like some spell-bound knight, Through blank oblivious years th’ appointed hour, To break thy trance and reassume thy power? Yet canst thou without thought or feeling be? O say what art thou, when no more thou ’rt thee?       Life! we’ve been long together,       Through pleasant and through cloudy weather;          ’Tis hard to part when friends are dear;          Perhaps ’t will cost a sigh, a tear;          Then steal away, give little warning,             Choose thine own time;       Say not Good night, but in some brighter clime             Bid me Good morning. 
***
a labyrinth, as if at its center, god would be there— but at the center, only rose, where rose came from,   where rose grows— & us, inside of the lips & lips: the likenesses, the eyes, & the hair, we are born of, fed by, & marry with, only flesh itself, only its passage —out of where?    to where? Then god the mother said to Jim, in a dream, Never mind you, Jim, come rest again on the country porch of my knees.
***
Instead of a cup of tea, instead of a milk- silk whelk of a cup, of a cup of nearly six o'clock teatime, cup of a stumbling block, cup of an afternoon unredeemed by talk, cup of a cut brown loaf, of a slice, a lack of butter, blueberry jam that's almost black, instead of tannin seeping into the cracks of a pot, the void of an hour seeps out, infects the slit of a cut I haven't the wit to fix with a surgeon's needle threaded with fine-gauge silk as a key would thread the cylinder of a lock. But no key threads the cylinder of a lock. Late afternoon light, transitory, licks the place of the absent cup with its rough tongue, flicks itself out beneath the wheel's revolving spoke. Taut thought's gone, with a blink of attention, slack, a vision of "death and distance in the mix" (she lost her words and how did she get them back when the corridor of a day was a lurching deck? The dream-life logic encodes in nervous tics she translated to a syntax which connects intense and unfashionable politics with morning coffee, Hudson sunsets, sex; then the short-circuit of the final stroke, the end toward which all lines looped out, then broke). What a gaze out the window interjects: on the southeast corner, a black Lab balks, tugged as the light clicks green toward a late-day walk by a plump brown girl in a purple anorak. The Bronx-bound local comes rumbling up the tracks out of the tunnel, over west Harlem blocks whose windows gleam on the animal warmth of bricks rouged by the fluvial light of six o'clock.
***
When a child is born, the parents say they hope it's healthy and intelligent. But as for me— well, vigor and intelligence have wrecked my life. I pray this baby we are seeing walloped, wiped and winningly anointed, turns out dumb as oakum—and more sinister. That way he can crown a tranquil life by being appointed a cabinet minister.
***
We were supposed to do a job in Italy and, full of our feeling for ourselves (our sense of being Poets from America) we went from Rome to Fano, met the mayor, mulled a couple matters over (what's a cheap date, they asked us; what's flat drink). Among Italian literati we could recognize our counterparts: the academic, the apologist, the arrogant, the amorous, the brazen and the glib—and there was one administrator (the conservative), in suit of regulation gray, who like a good tour guide with measured pace and uninflected tone narrated sights and histories the hired van hauled us past. Of all, he was the most politic and least poetic, so it seemed. Our last few days in Rome (when all but three of the New World Bards had flown) I found a book of poems this unprepossessing one had written: it was there in the pensione room (a room he'd recommended) where it must have been abandoned by the German visitor (was there a bus of them?) to whom he had inscribed and dated it a month before. I couldn't read Italian, either, so I put the book back into the wardrobe's dark. We last Americans were due to leave tomorrow. For our parting evening then our host chose something in a family restaurant, and there we sat and chatted, sat and chewed, till, sensible it was our last big chance to be poetic, make our mark, one of us asked                                              "What's poetry?" Is it the fruits and vegetables and marketplace of Campo dei Fiori, or the statue there?" Because I was the glib one, I identified the answer instantly, I didn't have to think—"The truth is both, it's both," I blurted out. But that was easy. That was easiest to say. What followed taught me something about difficulty, for our underestimated host spoke out, all of a sudden, with a rising passion, and he said: The statue represents Giordano Bruno, brought to be burned in the public square because of his offense against authority, which is to say the Church. His crime was his belief the universe does not revolve around the human being: God is no fixed point or central government, but rather is poured in waves through all things. All things move. "If God is not the soul itself, He is the soul of the soul of the world." Such was his heresy. The day they brought him forth to die, they feared he might incite the crowd (the man was famous for his eloquence). And so his captors placed upon his face an iron mask, in which he could not speak. That's how they burned him. That is how he died: without a word, in front of everyone.                      And poetry—                                         (we'd all put down our forks by now, to listen to the man in gray; he went on softly)—                   poetry is what he thought, but did not say.
***
First time he kissed me, he but only kissed The fingers of this hand wherewith I write, And ever since it grew more clean and white,... Slow to world-greetings...quick with its “Oh, list,” When the angels speak. A ring of amethyst I could not wear here plainer to my sight, Than that first kiss. The second passed in height The first, and sought the forehead, and half missed, Half falling on the hair. O beyond meed! That was the chrism of love, which love’s own crown, With sanctifying sweetness, did precede. The third, upon my lips, was folded down In perfect, purple state! since when, indeed, I have been proud and said, “My Love, my own.”
***
Who would be a turtle who could help it? A barely mobile hard roll, a four-oared helmet, she can ill afford the chances she must take in rowing toward the grasses that she eats. Her track is graceless, like dragging a packing-case places, and almost any slope defeats her modest hopes. Even being practical, she's often stuck up to the axle on her way to something edible. With everything optimal, she skirts the ditch which would convert her shell into a serving dish. She lives below luck-level, never imagining some lottery will change her load of pottery to wings. Her only levity is patience, the sport of truly chastened things.
***
Who, who had only seen wings, could extrapolate the skinny sticks of things birds use for land, the backward way they bend, the silly way they stand? And who, only studying birdtracks in the sand, could think those little forks had decamped on the wind? So many paired things seem odd. Who ever would have dreamed the broad winged raven of despair would quit the air and go bandylegged upon the ground, a common crow?
***
A few light flakes of snow Fall in the feeble sun; Birds sing in the cold, A warbler by the wall. The plum Buds tight and chill soon bloom. The moon begins first Fourth, a faint slice west At nightfall. Jupiter half-way High at the end of night- Meditation. The dove cry Twangs like a bow. At dawn Mt. Hiei dusted white On top; in the clear air Folds of all the gullied green Hills around the town are sharp, Breath stings. Beneath the roofs Of frosty houses Lovers part, from tangle warm Of gentle bodies under quilt And crack the icy water to the face And wake and feed the children And grandchildren that they love.
***
Three years ago, in the afternoons,                                             I used to sit back here and try To answer the simple arithmetic of my life, But never could figure it— This object and that object Never contained the landscape                                                           nor all of its implications, This tree and that shrub Never completely satisfied the sum or quotient I took from or carried to,                                                nor do they do so now, Though I'm back here again, looking to calculate, Looking to see what adds up. Everything comes from something,                                            only something comes from nothing, Lao Tzu says, more or less. Eminently sensible, I say, Rubbing this tiny snail shell between my thumb and two fingers. Delicate as an earring,                                           it carries its emptiness like a child It would be rid of. I rub it clockwise and counterclockwise, hoping for anything Resplendent in its vocabulary or disguise— But one and one make nothing, he adds,                                                                            endless and everywhere, The shadow that everything casts.
***
They pass before me one by one riding on animals "What are you waiting for," they want to know Z—, young as he is (& mad into the bargain) tells me "Some day you'll drop everything & become a rishi, you know." I know The forest is there, I've lived in it     More certainly than this town? Irrelevant—     What am I waiting for? A change in customs that will take 1000 years to come about? Who's to make the change but me?     "Returning again and again," Amida says Why's that dream so necessary? walking out of whatever house alone Nothing but the clothes on my back, money or no Down the road to the next place the highway leading to the   mountains From which I absolutely must come back What business have I to do that? I know the world and I love it too much and it Is not the one I'd find outside this door.
***
Before anything could happen, flecks of real gold on her mouth, her eyes more convex than any others, the ground spoke, the barrier of lilacs spoke. What sang in the black tree was entirely gold. Her chair was empty. New absence is a great figure dark as the underskin of fruit. At the center of the earth it surrounds and amplifies the dead whose music never slows down. She came by car. I came by train. We embraced. It was at the foot of a hill steeply crowned with apples and a ruined fortress. Imagination did not make the world. Sweetness is the entire portion. Before anything could happen, happiness, the necessary precondition of the world, spoke and flowered over the hill. When I was in Hell on the ruined palisade, either mystery or loneliness kissed my open eyes. It felt hugely convex, seeing and immediately forgetting. By contrast, what I imagined later was nothing.
***
It hangs from heaven to earth. There are trees in it, cities, rivers,   small pigs and moons. In one corner the snow falling over a charging cavalry,   in another women are planting rice. You can also see: a chicken carried off by a fox, a naked couple on their wedding night, a column of smoke, an evil-eyed woman spitting into a pail of milk. What is behind it? —Space, plenty of empty space. And who is talking now? —A man asleep under his hat. What happens when he wakes up? —He’ll go into a barbershop. They’ll shave his beard, nose, ears, and hair,   To make him look like everyone else.
***
On the first page of my dreambook It’s always evening In an occupied country.  Hour before the curfew.  A small provincial city.  The houses all dark. The storefronts gutted. I am on a street corner  Where I shouldn’t be.  Alone and coatless I have gone out to look For a black dog who answers to my whistle.  I have a kind of Halloween mask Which I am afraid to put on.
***
A small wheel  Incandescent,  Shivering like A pinned butterfly. Hands thrown up  In all directions:  The crossroads  One arrives at In a nightmare. Higher than that Number 12 presides Like a beekeeper Over the swarming honeycomb  Of the open watch. Other wheels  That could fit  Inside a raindrop. Tools That must be splinters  Of arctic starlight. Tiny golden mills  Grinding invisible  Coffee beans. When the coffee’s boiling  Cautiously, So it doesn’t burn us, We raise it To the lips Of the nearest Ear.
***
Nights, by the light of whatever would burn:  tallow, tinder and the silken rope of wick that burns slow, slow we wove the baskets from the long gold strands  of wheat that were another silk: worm soul spun the one, yellow seed in the dark soil, the other. The fields lay fallow, swollen with frost,  expectant winter. Mud clung to the edges of our gowns; we had hung back like shadows on the walls of trees and watched. In the little circles  that our tapers threw, murdered men rose red  in their clanging armor, muttered words that bled through the bars of iron masks: the lord who sold us to the glory fields, lied.***
The unicorn is an easy prey: its horn in the maiden’s lap is an obvious twist, a tamed figure—like the hawk that once roamed free, but sits now, fat and hooded,  squawking on the hunter’s wrist. It’s easy  to catch what no longer captures the mind, long since woven in, a faded tapestry on a crumbling wall made by the women who wore keys at their waists and in their sleep came hot dreams of wounded knights left bleeding in their care, who would wake the next morning  groaning from the leftover lance in the groin,  look up into the round blond face beaming down  at them thinking "mine," and say: "angel."  Such beasts are easy to catch; their dreams  betray them. But the hard prey is the one  that won’t come bidden. By these signs you will know it: when you lift your lure out of the water, the long plastic line will be missing its end: the lure and the hook  will be gone, and the line will swing free  in the air, so light it will be without bait or its cunning sharp curl of silver. Or when you pull your net from the stream, it will be eaten  as if by acid, its fine mesh sodden shreds. Or when you go at dawn to check your traps,  their great metal jaws will be wrenched open, the teeth blunt with rust as if they had lain for years in the rain. Or when the thunderstorm suddenly breaks  in the summer, next morning the computer’s memory will be blank. Look then for the blank card, the sprung trap,  the net’s dissolve, the unburdened  line that swings free in the air. There. By day, go empty-handed to the hunt  and come home the same way  in the dark. 
***
By the stream, where the ground is soft and gives, under the slightest pressure—even   the fly would leave its footprint here   and the paw of the shrew the crescent   of its claws like the strokes of a chisel   in clay; where the lightest chill, lighter   than the least rumor of winter, sets the reeds   to a kind of speaking, and a single drop of rain   leaves a crater to catch the first silver   glint of sun when the clouds slide away   from each other like two tired lovers,   and the light returns, pale, though brightened   by the last chapter of late autumn:   copper, rusted oak, gold aspen, and the red pages of maple, the wind leafing through to the end   the annals of beech, the slim volumes   of birch, the elegant script of the ferns ... for the birds, it is all notations for a coda, for the otter   an invitation to the river, and for the deer—a dream in which to disappear, light-footed   on the still open book of earth,   adding the marks of their passage,   adding it all in, waiting only for the first thick flurry of snowflakes   for cover, soft cover that carries   no title, no name.
***
The landings had gone wrong; white silk,  like shrouds, covered the woods. The trees had trapped the flimsy fabric in their web—everywhere the harnessed bodies  hung—helpless, treading air like water.                   We thought to float down easily—a simple thing like coming home: feet first, a welcome from the waiting fields, a gentle fall in clover. We hadn’t counted on this wilderness, the gusts of wind that took us over; we were surprised  by the tenacity of branching wood,  its reach, and how impenetrable the place we left, and thought we knew,  could be.                Sometimes now, as we sway, unwilling  pendulums that mark the time,  we still can dream someone will come and cut us down.  There is nothing here but words, the calls  we try the dark with—hoping for a human  ear, response, a rescue party. But all we hear is other voices like our own, other bodies  tangled in the lines, the repetition of a cry from every tree: I can’t help you, help me.
***
The cave looked much like any other  from a little distance but as we approached, came almost to its mouth, we saw its walls within  that slanted up into a dome were beating like a wild black lung— it was plastered and hung with  the pulsing bodies of bats, the organ  music of the body’s deep interior, alive, the sacred cave with its ten thousand gleaming eyes  near the clustered rocks where the sea beat with the leather  wings of its own dark waves. Below the bat-hung, throbbing walls,  an altar stood, glittering with guano,  a stucco sculpture like a Gaudi church, berserk Baroque, stone translated into flux—murk and mud and the floral  extravagance of wet sand dripped  from a giant hand, giving back blessing, excrement—return for the first fruits offered to the gods. We stayed outside, superior with fear, like tourists peering through a door, whose hanging  beads rattle in the air from one who disappeared into the dim interior; we thought of the caves of Marabar, of a writer who entered  and never quite emerged— the caves’ echoing black emptiness a tunnel in the English  soul where he is wandering still. So  the bat cave on the Bali coast, not far from Denpasar, holds us off, and beckons ... Standing there now, at the mouth  of the cave—this time we enter, feel  inside the flutter of those many hearts, the radiant heat of pumping  veins, the stretch of wing on bone  like a benediction, and the familiar  faces of this many-headed god,  benevolent as night is to the weary—the way at dark  the cave releases them all, how they must lift like the foam  on a wave breaking, how many  they are as they enter the starlit air, and scatter in wild wide arcs in search of fruit, the sweet bites  of mosquito ... while the great domes of our  own kind slide open, the eye  that watches, tracks the skies, and the huge doors roll slowly back  on the hangars, the planes  push out their noses of steel,  their wings a bright alloy of aluminum and death, they roar  down the runways, tear into the night, their heavy bodies fueled  from sucking at the hidden veins of earth; they leave a trail of fire  behind them as they scar  the air, filling the dreams  of children, sleeping—anywhere,  Chicago, Baghdad—with blood, as the bombs drop, as the world splits open, as the mothers  reach for their own in the night of the falling  sky, madness in method, nature gone  into reverse ... here, nearly unperturbed, the bats from the sacred cave  fill the night with their calls,  high-pitched, tuned to the solid world  as eyes to the spectrum of light, gnats  to the glow of a lamp—the bats  circle, the clouds wheel, the earth turns pulling the dome of stars among the spinning trees, blurring  the sweet globes of fruit, shaped  exactly to desire—dizzy, we swing  back to the cave on our stiff dark  wings, the sweet juice of papaya  drying on our jaws, home to the cave, to attach ourselves  back to the pulsing dome, until, hanging there, sated and sleepy, we can see what was once our world  upside down as it is and wonder whose altars those are, white, encrusted with shit. 
***
To turn a stone with its white squirming underneath, to pry the disc from the sun’s eclipse—white heat coiling in the blinded eye: to these malign   necessities we come from the dim time of dinosaurs who crawled like breathing lava from the earth’s cracked crust, and swung   their tiny heads above the lumbering tons   of flesh, brains no bigger than a fist clenched to resist the white flash in the sky the day the sun-flares pared them down to relics for museums,   turned glaciers back, seared Sinai’s meadows black—the ferns withered, the swamps   were melted down to molten mud, the cells   uncoupled, recombined, and madly multiplied, huge trees toppled to the ground,   the slow life there abandoned hope, a caterpillar stiffened in the grass. Two apes, caught in the act of coupling,   made a mutant child who woke to sunlight wondering, his mother   torn by the huge new head that forced the narrow birth canal. As if compelled to repetition   and to unearth again white fire at the heart of matter—fire we sought and fire we spoke, our thoughts, however elegant, were fire from first to last—like sentries set to watch   at Argos for the signal fire passed peak to peak from Troy to Nagasaki, triumphant echo of the burning   city walls and prologue to the murders   yet to come—we scan the sky for that bright flash, our eyes stared white from watching   for the signal fire that ends the epic—a cursed line with its caesura, a pause to signal peace, or a rehearsal for the silence.
***
What torture lurks within a single thought  When grown too constant; and however kind,  However welcome still, the weary mind Aches with its presence. Dull remembrance taught  Remembers on unceasingly; unsought  The old delight is with us but to find  That all recurring joy is pain refined,  Become a habit, and we struggle, caught.  You lie upon my heart as on a nest,  Folded in peace, for you can never know  How crushed I am with having you at rest  Heavy upon my life. I love you so You bind my freedom from its rightful quest.  In mercy lift your drooping wings and go. 
***
I want no horns to rouse me up to-night,   And trumpets make too clamorous a ring   To fit my mood, it is so weary white   I have no wish for doing any thing. A music coaxed from humming strings would please;   Not plucked, but drawn in creeping cadences   Across a sunset wall where some Marquise Picks a pale rose amid strange silences. Ghostly and vaporous her gown sweeps by   The twilight dusking wall, I hear her feet   Delaying on the gravel, and a sigh, Briefly permitted, touches the air like sleet And it is dark, I hear her feet no more.   A red moon leers beyond the lily-tank.   A drunken moon ogling a sycamore,   Running long fingers down its shining flank. A lurching moon, as nimble as a clown, Cuddling the flowers and trees which burn like glass. Red, kissing lips, I feel you on my gown— Kiss me, red lips, and then pass—pass. Music, you are pitiless to-night. And I so old, so cold, so languorously white. 
***
Cold, wet leaves Floating on moss-coloured water   And the croaking of frogs— Cracked bell-notes in the twilight. 
***
Gushing from the mouths of stone men To spread at ease under the sky In granite-lipped basins, Where iris dabble their feet And rustle to a passing wind, The water fills the garden with its rushing, In the midst of the quiet of close-clipped lawns. Damp smell the ferns in tunnels of stone,   Where trickle and plash the fountains,   Marble fountains, yellowed with much water. Splashing down moss-tarnished steps   It falls, the water; And the air is throbbing with it; With its gurgling and running; With its leaping, and deep, cool murmur. And I wished for night and you. I wanted to see you in the swimming-pool,   White and shining in the silver-flecked water. While the moon rode over the garden,   High in the arch of night, And the scent of the lilacs was heavy with stillness. Night and the water, and you in your whiteness, bathing! 
***
When I go away from you The world beats dead Like a slackened drum. I call out for you against the jutted stars  And shout into the ridges of the wind.  Streets coming fast, One after the other, Wedge you away from me, And the lamps of the city prick my eyes So that I can no longer see your face. Why should I leave you, To wound myself upon the sharp edges of the night? 
***
Pale, with the blue of high zeniths, shimmered over with silver, brocaded In smooth, running patterns, a soft stuff, with dark knotted fringes, it lies there, Warm from a woman’s soft shoulders, and my fingers close on it, caressing. Where is she, the woman who wore it? The scent of her lingers and drugs me. A languor, fire-shotted, runs through me, and I crush the scarf down on my face, And gulp in the warmth and the blueness, and my eyes swim in cool-tinted heavens. Around me are columns of marble, and a diapered, sun-flickered pavement. Rose-leaves blow and patter against it. Below the stone steps a lute tinkles. A jar of green jade throws its shadow half over the floor. A big-bellied Frog hops through the sunlight, and plops in the gold-bubbled water of a basin, Sunk in the black and white marble. The west wind has lifted a scarf On the seat close beside me; the blue of it is a violent outrage of colour. She draws it more closely about her, and it ripples beneath her slight stirring. Her kisses are sharp buds of fire; and I burn back against her, a jewel Hard and white, a stalked, flaming flower; till I break to a handful of cinders, And open my eyes to the scarf, shining blue in the afternoon sunshine. How loud clocks can tick when a room is empty, and one is alone!
***
Field The wind sprays pale dirt into my mouth The small, almost invisible scars On my hands.The pores in my throat and elbowsHave taken in a seed of dirt of their own.After a day in the grape fields near Rolinda A fine silt, washed by sweat, Has settled into the lines On my wrists and palms.Already I am becoming the valley, A soil that sprouts nothing. For any of us.Wind A dry wind over the valleyPeeled mountains, grain by grain, To small slopes, loose dirtWhere red ants tunnel.The wind strokesThe skulls and spines of cattle To white dust, to nothing,Covers the spiked tracks of beetles, Of tumbleweed, of sparrows That pecked the ground for insects.Evenings, when I am in the yard weeding, The wind picks up the breath of my armpitsLike dust, swirls it Miles awayAnd drops itOn the ear of a rabid dog, And I take on another life.Wind When you got up this morning the sun Blazed an hour in the sky,A lizard hidUnder the curled leaves of manzanita And winked its dark lids.Later, the sky grayed,And the cold wind you breathedWas moving under your skin and already far From the small hives of your lungs.Stars At dusk the first stars appear.Not one eager finger points toward them. A little later the stars spread with the night And an orange moon risesTo lead them, like a shepherd, toward dawn.Sun In June the sun is a bonnet of light Coming up,Little by little,From behind a skyline of pine.The pastures sway with fiddle-neck, Tassels of foxtail.At PiedraA couple fish on the river’s edge, Their shadows deep against the water. Above, in the stubbled slopes,Cows climb downAs the heat risesIn a mist of blond locusts,Returning to the valley.Rain When autumn rains flatten sycamore leaves, The tiny volcanos of dirtAnts raised around their holes,I should be out of work.My silverware and stack of plates will go unused Like the old, my two good slacksWill smother under a growth of lintAnd smell of the old dustThat risesWhen the closet door opens or closes.The skin of my belly will tighten like a belt And there will be no reason for pockets.Harvest East of the sun’s slant, in the vineyard that never failed, A wind crossed my face, moving the dust And a portion of my voice a step closer to a new year.The sky went black in the ninth hour of rolling trays, And in the distance ropes of rain dropped to pull me From the thick harvest that was not mine.Fog If you go to your windowYou will notice a fog drifting in.The sun is no stronger than a flashlight. Not all the sweaters Hung in closets all summerCould soak up this mist. The fog:A mouth nibbling everything to its origin, Pomegranate trees, stolen bicycles,The string of lights at a used-car lot, A Pontiac with scorched valves.In Fresno the fog is passingThe young thief prying a window screen, Graying my hair that fallsAnd goes unfound, my fingerprints Slowly growing a fur of dustOne hundred years from nowThere should be no reason to believe I lived.Daybreak In this moment when the light starts up In the east and rubs The horizon until it catches fire,We enter the fields to hoe,Row after row, among the small flags of onion, Waving off the dragonflies That ladder the air.And tears the onions raiseDo not begin in your eyes but in ours, In the salt blownFrom one blister into another;They begin in knowingYou will never waken to bearThe hour timed to a heart beat,The wind pressing us closer to the ground.When the season ends,And the onions are unplugged from their sleep, We won’t forget what you failed to see, And nothing will healUnder the rain’s broken fingers.
***
I walk down the garden paths, And all the daffodils Are blowing, and the bright blue squills.  I walk down the patterned garden paths  In my stiff, brocaded gown. With my powdered hair and jewelled fan,  I too am a rare Pattern. As I wander down The garden paths. My dress is richly figured,  And the train Makes a pink and silver stain  On the gravel, and the thrift  Of the borders. Just a plate of current fashion, Tripping by in high-heeled, ribboned shoes. Not a softness anywhere about me,  Only whale-bone and brocade.  And I sink on a seat in the shade  Of a lime tree. For my passion  Wars against the stiff brocade.  The daffodils and squills Flutter in the breeze As they please. And I weep; For the lime tree is in blossom And one small flower has dropped upon my bosom. And the splashing of waterdrops  In the marble fountain Comes down the garden paths.  The dripping never stops.  Underneath my stiffened gown Is the softness of a woman bathing in a marble basin, A basin in the midst of hedges grown So thick, she cannot see her lover hiding, But she guesses he is near, And the sliding of the water Seems the stroking of a dear Hand upon her. What is Summer in a fine brocaded gown! I should like to see it lying in a heap upon the ground.  All the pink and silver crumpled up on the ground. I would be the pink and silver as I ran along the paths,  And he would stumble after, Bewildered by my laughter. I should see the sun flashing from his sword-hilt and the buckles on his shoes. I would choose To lead him in a maze along the patterned paths, A bright and laughing maze for my heavy-booted lover,  Till he caught me in the shade, And the buttons of his waistcoat bruised my body as he clasped me, Aching, melting, unafraid. With the shadows of the leaves and the sundrops,  And the plopping of the waterdrops, All about us in the open afternoon I am very like to swoon With the weight of this brocade, For the sun sifts through the shade. Underneath the fallen blossom In my bosom, Is a letter I have hid. It was brought to me this morning by a rider from the Duke.  “Madam, we regret to inform you that Lord Hartwell  Died in action Thursday sen’night.” As I read it in the white, morning sunlight, The letters squirmed like snakes. “Any answer, Madam,” said my footman. “No,” l told him. “See that the messenger takes some refreshment. No, no answer.” And I walked into the garden, Up and down the patterned paths, In my stiff, correct brocade. The blue and yellow flowers stood up proudly in the sun,  Each one. I stood upright too, Held rigid to the pattern By the stiffness of my gown.  Up and down I walked,  Up and down. In a month he would have been my husband.  In a month, here, underneath this lime,  We would have broke the pattern; He for me, and I for him, He as Colonel, I as Lady, On this shady seat. He had a whim That sunlight carried blessing. And I answered, “It shall be as you have said.”  Now he is dead. In Summer and in Winter I shall walk Up and down The patterned garden paths  In my stiff, brocaded gown.  The squills and daffodils Will give place to pillared roses, and to asters, and to snow.  I shall go Up and down, In my gown. Gorgeously arrayed, Boned and stayed. And the softness of my body will be guarded from embrace  By each button, hook, and lace. For the man who should loose me is dead, Fighting with the Duke in Flanders, In a pattern called a war. Christ! What are patterns for?
***
STUDY IN WHITES Wax-white— Floor, ceiling, walls.   Ivory shadows Over the pavement   Polished to cream surfaces By constant sweeping. The big room is coloured like the petals Of a great magnolia,   And has a patina   Of flower bloom Which makes it shine dimly Under the electric lamps. Chairs are ranged in rows Like sepia seeds   Waiting fulfilment. The chalk-white spot of a cook’s cap Moves unglossily against the vaguely bright wall— Dull chalk-white striking the retina like a blow Thru the wavering uncertainty of steam. Vitreous-white of glasses with green reflections, Ice-green carboys, shifting—greener, bluer—with the jar of moving water. Jagged green-white bowls of pressed glass Rearing snow-peaks of chipped sugar Above the lighthouse-shaped castors Of grey pepper and grey-white salt. Grey-white placards: “Oyster Stew, Cornbeef Hash, Frankfurters”: Marble slabs veined with words in meandering lines.   Dropping on the white counter like horn notes Through a web of violins, The flat yellow lights of oranges, The cube-red splashes of apples, In high plated épergnes. The electric clock jerks every half-minute: “Coming!—Past!” “Three beef-steaks and a chicken-pie,” Bawled through a slide while the clock jerks heavily. A man carries a china mug of coffee to a distant chair. Two rice puddings and a salmon salad Are pushed over the counter; The unfulfilled chairs open to receive them. A spoon falls upon the floor with the impact of metal striking stone, And the sound throws across the room Sharp, invisible zigzags Of silver.
***
As I sit here in the quiet Summer night, Suddenly, from the distant road, there comes The grind and rush of an electric car. And, from still farther off, An engine puffs sharply, Followed by the drawn-out shunting scrape of a freight train.  These are the sounds that men make In the long business of living. They will always make such sounds, Years after I am dead and cannot hear them. Sitting here in the Summer night, I think of my death. What will it be like for you then? You will see my chair With its bright chintz covering Standing in the afternoon sunshine, As now. You will see my narrow table At which I have written so many hours. My dogs will push their noses into your hand,  And ask—ask— Clinging to you with puzzled eyes. The old house will still be here, The old house which has known me since the beginning.  The walls which have watched me while I played:  Soldiers, marbles, paper-dolls, Which have protected me and my books. The front-door will gaze down among the old trees  Where, as a child, I hunted ghosts and Indians;  It will look out on the wide gravel sweep Where I rolled my hoop, And at the rhododendron bushes Where I caught black-spotted butterflies. The old house will guard you, As I have done. Its walls and rooms will hold you, And I shall whisper my thoughts and fancies  As always, From the pages of my books. You will sit here, some quiet Summer night,  Listening to the puffing trains, But you will not be lonely, For these things are a part of me. And my love will go on speaking to you Through the chairs, and the tables, and the pictures,  As it does now through my voice, And the quick, necessary touch of my hand. 
***
This afternoon was the colour of water falling through sunlight; The trees glittered with the tumbling of leaves; The sidewalks shone like alleys of dropped maple leaves, And the houses ran along them laughing out of square, open windows. Under a tree in the park, Two little boys, lying flat on their faces, Were carefully gathering red berries To put in a pasteboard box. Some day there will be no war, Then I shall take out this afternoon And turn it in my fingers, And remark the sweet taste of it upon my palate, And note the crisp variety of its flights of leaves. To-day I can only gather it And put it into my lunch-box, For I have time for nothing But the endeavour to balance myself Upon a broken world.
***
Because there are avenuesOf traffic lights, a phone book Of brothers and lawyers,Why should you think your purse Will not be tugged from your arm Or the screen doorWill remain latchedAgainst the manWho hugs and kissesHis pillowIn the corridor of loneliness?There is a window of lightA sprinkler turningAs the earth turns,And you do not think of the hills And of the splintered wrists it takes To give youThe heat rising toward the ceiling.You expect your daughterTo be at the door any moment And your husband to arrive With the nightThat is suddenly all around. You expect the stove to burstA collar of fireWhen you want it,The siamese catsTo move against your legs, purring.But remember this:Because blood revolves from one lung to the next, Why think it willAfter tonight?
***
Lilacs, False blue, White, Purple, Color of lilac, Your great puffs of flowers Are everywhere in this my New England.  Among your heart-shaped leaves Orange orioles hop like music-box birds and sing  Their little weak soft songs; In the crooks of your branches The bright eyes of song sparrows sitting on spotted eggs  Peer restlessly through the light and shadow  Of all Springs. Lilacs in dooryards Holding quiet conversations with an early moon;  Lilacs watching a deserted house Settling sideways into the grass of an old road; Lilacs, wind-beaten, staggering under a lopsided shock of bloom Above a cellar dug into a hill. You are everywhere. You were everywhere. You tapped the window when the preacher preached his sermon, And ran along the road beside the boy going to school. You stood by the pasture-bars to give the cows good milking,  You persuaded the housewife that her dishpan was of silver.  And her husband an image of pure gold.  You flaunted the fragrance of your blossoms  Through the wide doors of Custom Houses— You, and sandal-wood, and tea, Charging the noses of quill-driving clerks  When a ship was in from China. You called to them: “Goose-quill men, goose-quill men,  May is a month for flitting.” Until they writhed on their high stools And wrote poetry on their letter-sheets behind the propped-up ledgers. Paradoxical New England clerks, Writing inventories in ledgers, reading the “Song of Solomon” at night, So many verses before bed-time, Because it was the Bible. The dead fed you Amid the slant stones of graveyards. Pale ghosts who planted you Came in the nighttime And let their thin hair blow through your clustered stems.  You are of the green sea, And of the stone hills which reach a long distance. You are of elm-shaded streets with little shops where they sell kites and marbles, You are of great parks where every one walks and nobody is at home. You cover the blind sides of greenhouses And lean over the top to say a hurry-word through the glass  To your friends, the grapes, inside. Lilacs, False blue, White, Purple, Color of lilac, You have forgotten your Eastern origin,  The veiled women with eyes like panthers, The swollen, aggressive turbans of jeweled pashas. Now you are a very decent flower,  A reticent flower, A curiously clear-cut, candid flower,  Standing beside clean doorways, Friendly to a house-cat and a pair of spectacles,  Making poetry out of a bit of moonlight  And a hundred or two sharp blossoms. Maine knows you, Has for years and years; New Hampshire knows you, And Massachusetts And Vermont. Cape Cod starts you along the beaches to Rhode Island;  Connecticut takes you from a river to the sea.  You are brighter than apples, Sweeter than tulips, You are the great flood of our souls Bursting above the leaf-shapes of our hearts,  You are the smell of all Summers, The love of wives and children, The recollection of gardens of little children,  You are State Houses and Charters And the familiar treading of the foot to and fro on a road it knows. May is lilac here in New England, May is a thrush singing “Sun up!” on a tip-top ash tree,  May is white clouds behind pine-trees  Puffed out and marching upon a blue sky.  May is a green as no other, May is much sun through small leaves,  May is soft earth, And apple-blossoms, And windows open to a South Wind.  May is full light wind of lilac From Canada to Narragansett Bay. Lilacs, False blue, White, Purple, Color of lilac. Heart-leaves of lilac all over New England,  Roots of lilac under all the soil of New England,  Lilac in me because I am New England, Because my roots are in it, Because my leaves are of it, Because my flowers are for it,  Because it is my country And I speak to it of itself And sing of it with my own voice  Since certainly it is mine.
***
Weep you no more, sad fountains;   What need you flow so fast? Look how the snowy mountains   Heaven’s sun doth gently waste.   But my sun’s heavenly eyes      View not your weeping,     That now lie sleeping  Softly, now softly lies         Sleeping. Sleep is a reconciling,   A rest that peace begets. Doth not the sun rise smiling   When fair at even he sets?  Rest you then, rest, sad eyes,      Melt not in weeping      While she lies sleepingSoftly, now softly lies         Sleeping.
***
The day is fresh-washed and fair, and there is a smell of tulips and narcissus in the air.        The sunshine pours in at the bath-room window and bores through the water in the bath-tub in lathes and planes of greenish-white. It cleaves the water into flaws like a jewel, and cracks it to bright light.        Little spots of sunshine lie on the surface of the water and dance, dance, and their reflections wobble deliciously over the ceiling; a stir of my finger sets them whirring, reeling. I move a foot and the planes of light in the water jar. I lie back and laugh, and let the green-white water, the sun-flawed beryl water, flow over me. The day is almost too bright to bear, the green water covers me from the too bright day. I will lie here awhile and play with the water and the sun spots. The sky is blue and high. A crow flaps by the window, and there is a whiff of tulips and narcissus in the air.
***
When the sun’s whiteness closes around us Like a noose,It is noon, and Molina squatsIn the uneven shade of an oleander.He unfolds a map and, with a pencil, Blackens PanamaInto a bruise;He dots rain over Bogotá, the city of spiders,And x’s in a mountain range that climbs Like a thermometerAbove the stone fenceThe old never thought to look over.A fog presses over Lima.Brazil is untangled of its rivers.Where there is a smudge,Snow has stitched its cold into the field.Where the river Orinoco cuts east, A new river rises namelessFrom the open grasses,And Molina calls it his place of birth.
***
Wedding nightGraciela bled lightlyBut enough to stain his thighsAnd left an alphabetOf teeth marks on his arm. At this, he was happy.They drank mescalIn bed like the richAnd smoked cigarettes.She asleepAnd the bottle empty, he hid A few coins in her left shoe, Earrings in the right.They worked long hoursHoeing crooked rows of maize. Evenings she wove rugsAnd embroidered curtains To market in Taxco.In short they lived well. However in the seventh month With child, her bellyRising like a portion of the sun, Something knotted inside her. The ribs ached. A fever climbed. Manuel summoned the Partera And though she burned pepper, And tied belts aroundThe stretched belly,The child did not ease out. Days later she turnedOnto her bellyAnd between her legsUnraveled a spine of blood.
***
Listen, nephew.When I opened the cantinaAt noonA triangle of sunlightWas stretched outOn the floorLike a rugLike a tired cat.It flared inFrom the window Through a small hole Shaped like a yawn. Strange I thought And placed my hand Before the opening, But the sunlight Did not vanish. I pulled backThe shuttersAnd the room glowed,But this pyramid Of whitenessWas simply brighter.The sunlight around it Appeared soiled Like the bed sheet Of a borracho.Amazed, I locked the door, Closed the windows. Workers, in from The fields, knocked To be let in,Children peeked Through the shutters,But I remained silent.I poured a beer, At a tableShuffled a pack Of old cards,And watched it Cross the floor, Hang on the wall Like a portrait Like a calendar Without numbers. When a fly settled In the sunlight And disappearedIn a wreath of smoke,I tapped it with the broom, Spat on it.The broom vanished.The spit sizzled.It is the truth, little one.I stood eye to blank eye And by misfortuneThis fingerThis pink stump Entered the sunlight, Snapped off With a dry sneeze,And fell to the floorAs a giftTo the antsWho know meFor what I gave.
***
“It’s a ’49,” Rhinehardt said, and slammed The screen door, then worked his way around The dog turds in the yardTo the Buick gutted from firethe gears Teething rust, the fenders slopedLike the shoulders of a fired worker Out of beer. He circled the carKicking the tires, eyeingThe grille that still grinned the ribbed wings Of a sparrow. He looked inside and flies Lifted like patted dust, settlingInto a loose knot on the visor.“Yeh, you’re right as right ... it’s a ’50,” Rhinehardt spat, his tongue rollingA false tooth into place. “It’s got noRunning board.” He pressed a buckInto his son’s hand and retired to the porch Where he towel-flickedHis wife from a chairAnd as evening came on watched beyond The street, a kennel of trees,Whereas he had dreameda plane would drop And bloom fire. Two bucks on that one.
***
Today it’s going to cost us twenty dollars To live. Five for a softball. Four for a book,A handful of ones for coffee and two sweet rolls, Bus fare, rosin for your mother’s violin. We’re completing our task. The tip I left For the waitress filters downLike rain, wetting the new roots of a child Perhaps, a belligerent cat that won’t let go Of a balled sock until there’s chicken to eat.As far as I can tell, daughter, it works like this: You buy bread from a grocery, a bag of apples From a fruit stand, and what coinsAre passed on helps others buy pencils, glue, Tickets to a movie in which laughter Is thrown into their faces.If we buy a goldfish, someone tries on a hat.If we buy crayons, someone walks home with a broom. A tip, a small purchase here and there, And things just keep going. I guess.
***
My chalk is no longer than a chip of fingernail, Chip by which I must explain this Monday Night the verbs “to get;” “to wear,” “to cut.” I’m not given much, these tired students, Knuckle-wrapped from work as roofers, Sour from scrubbing toilets and pedestal sinks. I’m given this room with five windows, A coffee machine, a piano with busted strings, The music of how we feel as the sun falls, Exhausted from keeping up.                                        I stand at The blackboard. The chalk is worn to a hangnail, Nearly gone, the dust of some educational bone. By and by I’m Cantiflas, the comic Busybody in front. I say, “I get the coffee.” I pick up a coffee cup and sip. I click my heels and say, “I wear my shoes.” I bring an invisible fork to my mouth And say, “I eat the chicken.” Suddenly the class is alive— Each one putting on hats and shoes, Drinking sodas and beers, cutting flowers And steaks—a pantomime of sumptuous living. At break I pass out cookies. Augustine, the Guatemalan, asks in Spanish, “Teacher, what is ‘tally-ho’?” I look at the word in the composition book. I raise my face to the bare bulb for a blind answer. I stutter, then say, “Es como adelante.” Augustine smiles, then nudges a friend In the next desk, now smarter by one word. After the cookies are eaten, We move ahead to prepositions— “Under,” “over,” and “between,” Useful words when la migra opens the doors Of their idling vans. At ten to nine, I’m tired of acting, And they’re tired of their roles. When class ends, I clap my hands of chalk dust, And two students applaud, thinking it’s a new verb. I tell them adelante, And they pick up their old books. They smile and, in return, cry, “Tally-ho.” As they head for the door.
***
Now goth sonne under wod: Me reweth, Marye, thy faire rode. Now goth sonne under tree:  Me reweth, Marye, thy sone and thee. 
***
I have a yong suster Fer beyonden the se, Many be the drowryes That she sente me. She sente me the cherye Withouten ony ston;  And so she dede the dove Withouten ony bon. She sente me the brer Withouten ony rinde; She bad me love my lemman Withoute longing. How shuld ony cherye Be withoute ston? And how shuld ony dove Be withoute bon? How shuld ony brer Been withoute rinde? How shuld I love myn lemman Withoute longing? Whan the cherye was a flowr Than hadde it non ston. When the dove was an ey Than hadde it non bon. When the brer was onbred Than hadde it non rind. Whan the maiden hath that she loveth She is without longing. 
***
“The wind doth blow today, my love,         And a few small drops of rain;      I never had but one true-love,         In cold grave she was lain.      “I’ll do as much for my true-love   As any young man may;      I’ll sit and mourn all at her grave         For a twelvemonth and a day.”The twelvemonth and a day being up,         The dead began to speak:        “Oh who sits weeping on my grave,   And will not let me sleep?”“’T is I, my love, sits on your grave,         And will not let you sleep;      For I crave one kiss of your clay-cold lips,   And that is all I seek.”“You crave one kiss of my clay-cold lips,         But my breath smells earthy strong;      If you have one kiss of my clay-cold lips,         Your time will not be long.“’T is down in yonder garden green,         Love, where we used to walk,      The finest flower that e’re was seen         Is withered to a stalk.      “The stalk is withered dry, my love,   So will our hearts decay;      So make yourself content, my love,         Till God calls you away.”
***
The silver swan, who living had no note, When death approached, unlocked her silent throat; Leaning her breast against the reedy shore, Thus sung her first and last, and sung no more: “Farewell, all joys; Oh death, come close mine eyes; More geese than swans now live, more fools than wise.”
***
Sitteth alle stille and herkneth to me!  The King of Alemaigne, by mi leaute, Thritty thousand pound askede he For to make the pees in the countre—And so he dude more.  Richard, thah thou be ever trichard,  Tricchen shalt thou nevermore.Richard of Alemaigne, whil that he wes king,He spende all his tresour upon swiving.Haveth he nout of Walingford o ferling!Let him habbe ase he brew—bale to dring—Maugre Windesore.  Richard, thah thou be ever trichard,  Tricchen shalt thou nevermore.The King of Alemaigne wende do full well: He saised the mulne for a castel;With hare sharpe swerdes he grounde the stel— He wende that the sailes were mangonelTo helpe Windesore.  Richard, thah thou be ever trichard,  Tricchen shalt thou nevermore.The king of Alemaigne gederede his host, Makede him a castel of a mulne post, Wende with his prude and his muchele bost, Broughte from Alemaigne mony sory ghostTo store Windesore.  Richard, thah thou be ever trichard,  Tricchen shalt thou nevermore.By God that is aboven ous, he dude muche sinThat lette passen over see the Erl of Warin:He hath robbed Engelond, the more and the fen,The gold and the selver, and iboren henne,For love of Windesore.   Richard, thah thou be ever trichard,  Tricchen shalt thou nevermore.Sire Simon de Montfort hath swore by his chin,Hevede he now here the Erl of Warin, Shulde he never more come to his inn,Ne with sheld, ne with spere, ne with other gin,To help of Wyndesore.  Richard, thah thou be ever trichard,  Tricchen shalt thou nevermore.Sire Simon de Montfort hath swore by his top,Hevede he now here Sir Hue de Bigot,All he shulde equite here twelfmoneth scot—Shulde he never more with his fot potTo helpe Windesore.  Richard, thah thou be ever trichard,  Tricchen shalt thou nevermore.Be thee luef, be thee loth, Sire Edward,Thou shalt ride sporeles o thy liarAll the righte way to Dovereward—Shalt thou nevermore breke foreward,And that reweth sore.Richard, thah thou be ever trichard,Tricchen shalt thou nevermore.Edward, thou dudest ase a shreward,Forsoke thine eme’s lore.
***
Jesu Christ, my lemmon swete,That diyedest on the Rode Tree,With all my might I thee beseche,For thy woundes two and three,That also faste mot thy loveInto mine herte fitched beAs was the spere into thine herte,Whon thou soffredest deth for me.
***
A baby is borne us blis to bring;A maidden, I hard, “Loullay,” sing: “Dere son, now leive thy wepping,Thy fadere is the King of Blis.”“Nay! Dere modere, for you weppe I noght,But for thinges that shall be wroght,Or that I have mankind iboght.Was ther never pain like it, iwis.”“Pes! dere sone, say thou me not so.Thou art my child, I have no mo.Alas! That I shuld see this wo:It were to me gret heivynis.”“My hondes, modere, that ye now see,Thay shall be nailed one a tree;My feit, also, fastned shall be: Full mony shall wepe that it shall see.”“Alas! dere son, sorrow now is my happeTo see my child that soukes my pappeSo ruthfully taken out of my lappe.It were to me gret heivynis.”“Also, modere, ther shall a speireMy tendere hert all to-teire:The blud shall kevere my body there.Gret ruthe it shall be to see.”“A! dere sone, that is a heivy cas.When Gabrell knelled before my faceAnd said, ‘Heille! Lady, full of grace,’He never told me nothing of this.“Dere modere, pes!  Nowe I you pray,And take no sorrow for that I say, But singe this song, ‘By, by, loullay,’To drive away all heivynis.”
***
My ghostly fader, I me confess,First to God and then to you,That at a window, wot ye how,I stale a kosse of gret swetness,Which don was out avisiness—But it is doon, not undoon, now.My ghostly fader, I me confess,First to God and then to you.But I restore it shall, doutless,Agein, if so be that I mow;And that to God I make a vow,And elles I axe foryefness.My ghostly fader, I me confesse,First to God and then to you.
***
They flee from me, that sometime did me seek     With naked foot, stalking in my chamber. I have seen them gentle, tame, and meek,     That now are wild, and do not remember     That sometime they put themselves in danger          To take bread at my hand; and now they range          Busily seeking with a continual change. Thanked be fortune it hath been otherwise     Twenty times better; but once, in special, In thin array, after a pleasant guise,     When her loose gown from her shoulders did fall,     And she me caught in her arms long and small;          Therewith all sweetly did me kiss,          And softly said, ‘Dear heart, how like you this?’ It was no dream: I lay broad waking:     But all is turned, thorough my gentleness, Into a strange fashion of forsaking;     And I have leave to go of her goodness,     And she also to use newfangleness.          But since that I so kindly am served,          I would fain know what she hath deserved. 
***
New yeare forth looking out of Janus gate,Doth seeme to promise hope of new delight:And bidding th’old Adieu, his pass
***
In that proud port, which her so goodly graceth, Whiles her faire face she reares up to the skie: And to the ground her eie lids low embaseth Most goodly temperature ye may descry, Myld humblesse mixt with awfull majesty, For looking on the earth whence she was borne: Her minde remembreth her mortalitie, What so is fayrest shall to earth returne. But that same lofty countenance seemes to scorne Base thing, and thinke how she to heaven may clime: Treading downe earth as lothsome and forlorne, That hinders heavenly thoughts with drossy slime. Yet lowly still vouchsafe to looke on me, Such lowlinesse shall make you lofty be.
***
Behold, the grave of a wicked man,And near it, a stern spirit.There came a drooping maid with violets, But the spirit grasped her arm.“No flowers for him,” he said.The maid wept: “Ah, I loved him.”But the spirit, grim and frowning: “No flowers for him.” Now, this is it —If the spirit was just,Why did the maid weep?
***
Not at first sight, nor with a dribbèd shot,    Love gave the wound which while I breathe will bleed:    But known worth did in mine of time proceed, Till by degrees it had full conquest got. I saw, and liked; I liked, but lovèd not;    I loved, but straight did not what love decreed:    At length to love’s decrees I, forced, agreed, Yet with repining at so partial lot.    Now even that footstep of lost liberty Is gone, and now like slave-born Muscovite I call it praise to suffer tyranny; And now employ the remnant of my wit    To make myself believe that all is well,    While with a feeling skill I paint my hell.
***
It is most true, that eyes are formed to serve The inward light; and that the heavenly part Ought to be king, from whose rules who do swerve, Rebels to Nature, strive for their own smart.     It is most true, what we call Cupid’s dart, An image is, which for ourselves we carve; And, fools, adore in temple of our heart, Till that good god make Church and churchman starve.     True, that true beauty virtue is indeed, Whereof this beauty can be but a shade, Which elements with mortal mixture breed; True, that on earth we are but pilgrims made,     And should in soul up to our country move; True; and yet true, that I must Stella love.
***
Stella is sick, and in that sick-bed lies Sweetness, that breathes and pants as oft as she; And grace, sick too, such fine conclusions tries That sickness brags itself best graced to be.     Beauty is sick, but sick in so fair guise That in that paleness beauty’s white we see; And joy, which is inseparate from these eyes, Stella now learns (strange case!) to weep in thee.    Love moves thy pain, and like a faithful page, As thy looks stir, runs up and down, to make All folks prest at thy will thy pain to assuage; Nature with care sweats for her darling’s sake,    Knowing worlds pass, ere she enough can find    Of such heaven stuff, to clothe so heavenly mind.
***
Where be the roses gone, which sweetened so our eyes?     Where those red cheeks, which oft with fair increase did frame     The height of honor in the kindly badge of shame? Who hath the crimson weeds stolen from my morning skies? How doth the color vade of those vermilion dyes,     Which Nature's self did make, and self engrained the same!     I would know by what right this paleness overcame That hue, whose force my heart still unto thraldom ties?     Galen's adoptive sons, who by a beaten way     Their judgements hackney on, the fault on sickness lay; But feeling proof makes me say they mistake it far:     It is but love, which makes his paper perfect white     To write therein more fresh the story of delight, Whiles beauty's reddest ink Venus for him doth stir.
***
I saw a man pursuing the horizon; Round and round they sped. I was disturbed at this;   I accosted the man. “It is futile,” I said, “You can never —” “You lie,” he cried,   And ran on. 
***
O absent presence, Stella is not here;     False flattering hope, that with so fair a face     Bare me in hand, that in this orphan place Stella, I say my Stella, should appear. What say’st thou now? Where is that dainty cheer     Thou told’st mine eyes should help their famished case?     But thou art gone, now that self-felt disgrace Doth make me most to wish thy comfort near.     But here I do store of fair ladies meet,     Who may with charm of conversation sweet Make in my heavy mould new thoughts to grow:     Sure they prevail as much with me, as he     That bade his friend, but then new maimed, to be Merry with him, and not think of his woe.
***
Unto the boundless Ocean of thy beauty Runs this poor river, charged with streams of zeal: Returning thee the tribute of my duty, Which here my love, my youth, my plaints reveal. Here I unclasp the book of my charged soul, Where I have cast th'accounts of all my care: Here have I summed my sighs, here I enroll How they were spent for thee; look what they are. Look on the dear expenses of my youth, And see how just I reckon with thine eyes: Examine well thy beauty with my truth, And cross my cares ere greater sum arise. Read it sweet maid, though it be done but slightly; Who can show all his love, doth love but lightly.
***
But love whilst that thou mayst be loved again, Now whilst thy May hath filled thy lap with flowers, Now whilst thy beauty bears without a stain, Now use the summer smiles, ere winter lowers. And whilst thou spread’st unto the rising sun The fairest flower that ever saw the light, Now joy thy time before thy sweet be done, And, Delia, think thy morning must have night, And that thy brightness sets at length to west, When thou wilt close up that which now thou shew’st; And think the same becomes thy fading best Which then shall most inveil and shadow most. Men do not weigh the stalk for what it was, When once they find her flower, her glory, pass.
***
When forty winters shall besiege thy brow And dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field, Thy youth’s proud livery, so gazed on now, Will be a tattered weed, of small worth held. Then being asked where all thy beauty lies— Where all the treasure of thy lusty days— To say within thine own deep-sunken eyes Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise. How much more praise deserved thy beauty’s use  If thou couldst answer "This fair child of mine Shall sum my count and make my old excuse",  Proving his beauty by succession thine.     This were to be new made when thou art old,     And see thy blood warm when thou feel’st it cold.
***
A woman’s face with nature’s own hand painted Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion; A woman’s gentle heart, but not acquainted With shifting change as is false women’s fashion; An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth; A man in hue, all hues in his controlling, Which steals men’s eyes and women’s souls amazeth. And for a woman wert thou first created, Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting, And by addition me of thee defeated By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.       But since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure,       Mine be thy love and thy love’s use their treasure.
***
Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all: What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call— All mine was thine before thou hadst this more. Then if for my love thou my love receivest, I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest; But yet be blamed if thou this self deceivest By wilful taste of what thyself refusest. I do forgive thy robb’ry, gentle thief, Although thou steal thee all my poverty; And yet love knows it is a greater grief To bear love’s wrong than hate’s known injury.     Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,     Kill me with spites, yet we must not be foes.
***
When that I was and a little tiny boy,     With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, A foolish thing was but a toy,     For the rain it raineth every day. But when I came to man’s estate,     With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, ’Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate,     For the rain it raineth every day. But when I came, alas! to wive,     With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, By swaggering could I never thrive,     For the rain it raineth every day. But when I came unto my beds,     With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, With toss-pots still had drunken heads,     For the rain it raineth every day. A great while ago the world begun,     With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, But that’s all one, our play is done,     And we’ll strive to please you every day.
***
Fear no more the heat o’ the sun, Nor the furious winter’s rages; Thou thy worldly task hast done, Home art gone, and ta’en thy wages: Golden lads and girls all must, As chimney-sweepers, come to dust. Fear no more the frown o’ the great; Thou art past the tyrant’s stroke; Care no more to clothe and eat; To thee the reed is as the oak: The scepter, learning, physic, must All follow this, and come to dust. Fear no more the lightning flash, Nor the all-dreaded thunder stone; Fear not slander, censure rash; Thou hast finished joy and moan: All lovers young, all lovers must Consign to thee, and come to dust. No exorciser harm thee! Nor no witchcraft charm thee! Ghost unlaid forbear thee! Nothing ill come near thee! Quiet consummation have; And renownèd be thy grave!
***
The weary yeare his race now having run, The new begins his compast course anew: With shew of morning mylde he hath begun, Betokening peace and plenty to ensew.So let us, which this chaunge of weather vew, Chaunge eeke our mynds and former lives amend,The old yeares sinnes forepast let us eschew, And fly the faults with which we did offend. Then shall the new yeares joy forth freshly send, Into the glooming world his gladsome ray: And all these stormes which now his beauty blend, Shall turne to caulmes and tymely cleare away. So likewise love cheare you your heavy spright, And chaunge old yeares annoy to new delight.
***
I stood on the bridge at midnight,    As the clocks were striking the hour, And the moon rose o'er the city,    Behind the dark church-tower.  I saw her bright reflection    In the waters under me, Like a golden goblet falling    And sinking into the sea.  And far in the hazy distance    Of that lovely night in June, The blaze of the flaming furnace    Gleamed redder than the moon.  Among the long, black rafters    The wavering shadows lay, And the current that came from the ocean    Seemed to lift and bear them away;  As, sweeping and eddying through them,    Rose the belated tide, And, streaming into the moonlight,    The seaweed floated wide.  And like those waters rushing    Among the wooden piers, A flood of thoughts came o’er me    That filled my eyes with tears.  How often, O, how often,    In the days that had gone by, I had stood on that bridge at midnight    And gazed on that wave and sky!  How often, O, how often,    I had wished that the ebbing tide Would bear me away on its bosom    O’er the ocean wild and wide!  For my heart was hot and restless,    And my life was full of care, And the burden laid upon me    Seemed greater than I could bear.  But now it has fallen from me,    It is buried in the sea; And only the sorrow of others    Throws its shadow over me.  Yet whenever I cross the river    On its bridge with wooden piers, Like the odor of brine from the ocean    Comes the thought of other years.  And I think how many thousands    Of care-encumbered men, Each bearing his burden of sorrow,    Have crossed the bridge since then.  I see the long procession    Still passing to and fro, The young heart hot and restless,    And the old subdued and slow!  And forever and forever,    As long as the river flows, As long as the heart has passions,    As long as life has woes;  The moon and its broken reflection    And its shadows shall appear, As the symbol of love in heaven,    And its wavering image here. 
***
To all those happy blessings which ye have, With plenteous hand by heaven upon you thrown: This one disparagement they to you gave, That ye your love lent to so meane a one. Yee whose high worths surpassing paragon, Could not on earth have found one fit for mate, Ne but in heaven matchable to none, Why did ye stoup unto so lowly state. But ye thereby much greater glory gate, Then had ye sorted with a princes pere: For now your light doth more it selfe dilate, And in my darknesse greater doth appeare. Yet since your light hath once enlumind me, With my reflex yours shall encreased be.
***
nodding tho' the lamps lit low nodding for passers underground to and fro she's darning and the yarn is weeping red and pale marking the train stops from algiers sleeping tho' the eyes are pale hums in rhythum w/a bonnet on lullaby a broken song the sifting-cloth is bleeding red weeping yarn from algiers lullaby tho' baby's gone the cradle rocks a barren song she's rocking w/her ribbons on she's rocking yarn and needles oh it's long coming from algiers
***
Oh Raphael. Guardian angel. In love and crime all things move in sevens. seven compartments in the heart. the seven elaborate temptations. seven devils cast from Mary Magdalene whore of Christ. the seven marvelous voyages of Sinbad. sin/bad. And the number seven branded forever on the forehead of Cain. The first inspired man. The father of desire and murder. But his was not the first ecstasy. Consider his mother. Eve's was the crime of curiosity. As the saying goes: it killed the pussy. One bad apple spoiled the whole shot. But be sure it was no apple. An apple looks like an ass. It's fags' fruit. It must have been a tomato. Or better yet. A mango. She bit. Must we blame her. abuse her. poor sweet bitch. perhaps there's more to the story. think of Satan as some stud. maybe her knees were open. satan snakes between them. they open wider snakes up her thighs rubs against her for a while more than the tree of knowledge was about to be eaten...she shudders her first shudder pleasure pleasure garden was she sorry are we ever girls was she a good lay god only knows
***
yum yum the stars are out. I'll never forget how you smelled that night. like cheddar cheese melting under fluorescent light. like a day-old rainbow fish. what a dish. gotta lick my lips. gotta dream I day- dream. thorozine brain cloud. rain rain comes com- ing down. all over her. there she is on the hill. pale as a posy. getting soaking wet. hope her petticoats shrink. well little shepherd girl your gonna kingdom come. looking so clean. the guardian of every little lamb. well beep beep sheep I'm moving in. I'm gonna peep in bo's bodice. lay down darling don't be modest let me slip my hand in. ohhh that's soft that's nice that's not used up. ohhh don't cry. wet what's wet? oh that. heh heh. that's just the rain lambie pie. now don't squirm. let me put my rubber on. I'm a wolf in a lamb skin trojan. ohh yeah that's hard that's good. now don't tighten up. open up be- bop. lift that little butt up. ummm open wider be-bop. come on. nothing. can. stop me. now. ohhh ahhh. isn't that good. my. melancholy be-bop. Oh don't cry. come on get up. let's dance in the grass. let's cut a rug let's jitterbug. roll those tiny white stockings down. bobby sock-o let's flow. come on this is a dance contest. under the stars, let's alice in the grass. let's swing betty boop hoop let's birdland let's stroll let's rock let's roll let's whalebone let's go let's deodorize the night.
***
A black satin purse in her right hand, condoms, spermicide, her key to the birdcage elevator. All night, thunder and rain in a flash of lightning, his hands visible, leaves of philodendron, a half-moon table. They talk in near dark, eating from a basket. She places her hand in his lap, opens her legs as if God came from her, fragrance pluming like smoke. All night, his tongue like a fish philodendron green smoothing half-light. Now the bridge is illuminated, twin arches rising, chalky, incandescent, light abandoning the dome of sky, river breathing azure, its surface frazzled, the moon leaving her scuff marks. Near the open window, dark of leaves. Outside at dawn, the sun hidden, a crow lowering itself on black wings crosses before windows as gold as Rome. The telephone, her mouth open. I can see all the way into you, he says. Leaves of philodendron pour from the table.
***
The glass door was spinning panes like an open book. A suit the color of sky close to night, wire of eyeglasses a gold moon. He bowed as if judicial and called a French name. Glasses were filled with ice the color of amber. We were in America. He asked me to take his hands. They are cold, he said. I warmed his cold hands as we sat on the rouge banquette. It was the last May of the century. His eyes looked at my face. His hand fell to the glacier of my thigh and held on. My gold tail swam dark green water, the ocean smelled of gardenia. Outside on the avenue people scurried to their palaces, wearing sunglasses, carrying shiny bags.
***
When I wake up, I can remember touching the back of your neck, the cut of your hair blunt under my fingers. In the dream you have met my mother. My sisters and I are living in a grand house where I have no room of my own. One of my sisters has delineated her property by stringing a rope from which she will hang photographs of our dead father. At the beginning of Christianity, a bishop established what is called the "canon of truth" in order to unify feuding believers into a single way of apprehending the sacred. His teachings excluded the workings of imagination as subjective, vulnerable to self-interest, and possibly insane. Your neck, the blunt cut of your hair sharp and fragrant on my fingers. You come to the big house, you have just met my mother at a party where curtains of royal blue fell to the floor. The music by Scarlatti. My hair is turning gray. I look in the mirror. The familiar dark hairs are fine and smooth, the white are rough and thick like the fiber of which clouds are woven. I want to pluck out the white hairs, but my tweezer falls through them like logic through the sense of dreams. I am getting old, soon it will be too late. Your hand will slide from my skin like silk falling from a polished table. In the big house you come to me, and I show you my rectangle of floor. It is here I will put my couch and desk, separated from my sister and her pictures of our dead father by the edges of my body, myself, my thinking. You consider me. We stand there for a while. My sister is attaching the large photographs of our father to a rope. I look into the mirror at my white hair. I have sworn I will never dye it, but now I must. The white hairs are growing as fast as snow falls across a landscape. Soon snow will obliterate the town and countryside, there will be no houses visible, cars will disappear under the mass of it, trees will become poignant marks on a dangerous blank. My sister strings photographs of our dead father along the rope, attaching them with small invisible clips. I wait for you. I think about your face, how you are becoming bald, and then I remember touching you for the first time, the back of your neck. I was wondering how to find you, what I would discover there. It made me almost cry that you stayed perfectly still, certain, it seemed, that what I was imparting was of utmost consequence. I moved my fingers tentatively, as if finding first knowledge in a terrain I could slip beneath, into a garden. I remembered that when I woke up. That and your sticky skin. Certain early Christian ideologues denigrated imagination as outside the realms of good and evil. My mother is no longer dead, and you have met her. The air is transparent, the colors dark wood and pale amber. I am standing at the mirror watching white hair grow in as fast as snow. What time is the train coming? You sit at the window, your legs crossed. Courtly and at ease, you scrutinize my face until I am self-conscious. I become aware that you are waiting for me. I don't know how to get to you. Some early Christians, those who came to be persecuted as heretics, believed that a part of God is perpetually hidden from us. In relation to that realm of the deity dwells imagination, unceasingly seeking understanding of what is concealed. I can see you on the window seat in an elegantly cut suit, as if wearing such clothes were a form of grace. I remember you in that suit, standing in the hotel, turning on your heel to look for me. Now the window is tall behind you, twilight gathering outside the glass, cedars black beyond the roses. I am not dead, yet I am mute as the dead usually are in dreams. You are speaking in a clear voice, explaining you have met my mother and that I look like her. Before sleep, I was reading about early Christianity. When I woke up from the long dream, there we were in the taxicab, my arms tentative around you, my fingers seeking the back of your neck. I felt clearly the blunt edge of your newly cut hair, the stickiness of your skin, that mortal stickiness– When my mother's mother was sixty, her hair was still dark. When my mother died at fifty, her hair was still black, though as she sickened, it turned white, black receding as life did. I stand at the mirror, its rare wide-beveled glass framed by oak carved to leaves and flowers. I am scrutinizing myself. My face is not ageing, but my hair is turning white, cloaking the trees, falling on the meadow, windblown across the frozen lake. What heresy is it that you come to me in a dream, knowing everything? The tall windows rise to the ceiling, but I don't lift my eyes. I don't want to lose sight of you. Outside, the cedars. Beyond them a smooth body of water.
***
It seemed as if we did not sleep One wink that night; I was sighing deep. The cruellest judge in the costliest court Could not condemn a night so short. We had the light out, but I know, Each time I turned, a radiant glow Suffused the room, and shining snow Alit from Heaven’s candle-fires Illuminated our desires. But the last time I held her, strong, Excited, closest, very long, Something started to go wrong. The edge of dawn’s despotic veil Showed at the eastern window-pale And there it was,—the morning light! Gwen was seized with a fearful fright, Became an apparition, cried, “Get up, go now with God, go hide! “Love is a salt, a gall, a rue, A vinegar-vintage. Dos y Ddw, Vaya con Dios, quickly, too!” “Ah, not yet, never yet, my love; The stars and moon still shine above.” “Then why do the raucous ravens talk With such a loud insistent squawk?” “Crows always cry like that, when fleas Nibble their ankles, nip their knees.” “And why do the dogs yip, yammer, yell?” “They think they’ve caught a fox’s smell.” “Poet, the wisdom of a fool Offers poor counsel as a rule. Open the door, open it wide As fast as you can, and leap outside. The dogs are fierce when they get untied.” “The woods are only a bound from here, And I can outjump a deer, my dear!” “But tell me, best beloved of men, Will you come again? Will you come again?” “Gwen, you know I’m your nightingale, And I’ll be with you, without fail, When the cloud is cloak, and the dark is sky, And when the night comes, so will I.”
***
Across North Wales The snowflakes wander, A swarm of white bees. Over the woods A cold veil lies. A load of chalk  Bows down the trees. No undergrowth Without its wool, No field unsheeted;  No path is left Through any field; On every stump White flour is milled. Will someone tell me What angels lift  Planks in the flour-loft Floor of heaven Shaking down dust? An angel’s cloak Is cold quicksilver. And here below The big drifts blow, Blow and billow Across the heather Like swollen bellies. The frozen foam Falls in fleeces. Out of my house I will not stir For any girl To have my coat Look like a miller’s  Or stuck with feathers Of eider down. What a great fall Lies on my country! A wide wall, stretching One sea to the other,  Greater and graver Than the sea’s graveyard. When will rain come?
***
A ward, and still in bonds, one day      I stole abroad;It was high spring, and all the way   Primrosed and hung with shade;   Yet was it frost within,      And surly windsBlasted my infant buds, and sin   Like clouds eclipsed my mind.Stormed thus, I straight perceived my spring      Mere stage and show,My walk a monstrous, mountained thing,   Roughcast with rocks and snow;   And as a pilgrim’s eye,      Far from relief,Measures the melancholy sky,   Then drops and rains for grief,So sighed I upwards still; at last      ’Twixt steps and fallsI reached the pinnacle, where placed   I found a pair of scales;   I took them up and laid      In th’ one, late pains;The other smoke and pleasures weighed,   But proved the heavier grains.With that some cried, “Away!” Straight I      Obeyed, and ledFull east, a fair, fresh field could spy;   Some called it Jacob’s bed,   A virgin soil which no      Rude feet ere trod,Where, since he stepped there, only go   Prophets and friends of God.Here I reposed; but scarce well set,      A grove descriedOf stately height, whose branches met   And mixed on every side;   I entered, and once in,      Amazed to see ’t,Found all was changed, and a new spring   Did all my senses greet.The unthrift sun shot vital gold,      A thousand pieces,And heaven its azure did unfold,   Checkered with snowy fleeces;   The air was all in spice,      And every bushA garland wore; thus fed my eyes,   But all the ear lay hush.Only a little fountain lent      Some use for ears,And on the dumb shades language spent   The music of her tears;   I drew her near, and found      The cistern fullOf divers stones, some bright and round,   Others ill-shaped and dull.The first, pray mark, as quick as light      Danced through the flood,But the last, more heavy than the night,   Nailed to the center stood;   I wondered much, but tired      At last with thought,My restless eye that still desired   As strange an object brought.It was a bank of flowers, where I descried      Though ’twas midday,Some fast asleep, others broad-eyed   And taking in the ray;   Here, musing long, I heard      A rushing windWhich still increased, but whence it stirred   No where I could not find.I turned me round, and to each shade      Dispatched an eyeTo see if any leaf had made    Least motion or reply,   But while I listening sought      My mind to easeBy knowing where ’twas, or where not,   It whispered, “Where I please.”“Lord,” then said I, “on me one breath,And let me die before my death!”Cant. chap. 5. ver. 17Arise O North, and come thou South-wind and blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out.***
          Through that pure virgin shrine, That sacred veil drawn o’er Thy glorious noon, That men might look and live, as glowworms shine,              And face the moon,     Wise Nicodemus saw such light     As made him know his God by night.          Most blest believer he! Who in that land of darkness and blind eyes Thy long-expected healing wings could see,              When Thou didst rise!     And, what can never more be done,     Did at midnight speak with the Sun!          O who will tell me where He found Thee at that dead and silent hour? What hallowed solitary ground did bear              So rare a flower,     Within whose sacred leaves did lie     The fulness of the Deity?          No mercy-seat of gold, No dead and dusty cherub, nor carved stone, But His own living works did my Lord hold              And lodge alone;     Where trees and herbs did watch and peep     And wonder, while the Jews did sleep.          Dear night! this world’s defeat; The stop to busy fools; care’s check and curb; The day of spirits; my soul’s calm retreat              Which none disturb!     Christ’s progress, and His prayer time;     The hours to which high heaven doth chime;          God’s silent, searching flight; When my Lord’s head is filled with dew, and all His locks are wet with the clear drops of night;              His still, soft call;     His knocking time; the soul’s dumb watch,     When spirits their fair kindred catch.          Were all my loud, evil days Calm and unhaunted as is thy dark tent, Whose peace but by some angel’s wing or voice              Is seldom rent,     Then I in heaven all the long year     Would keep, and never wander here.          But living where the sun Doth all things wake, and where all mix and tire Themselves and others, I consent and run              To every mire,     And by this world’s ill-guiding light,     Err more than I can do by night.          There is in God, some say, A deep but dazzling darkness, as men here Say it is late and dusky, because they              See not all clear.     O for that night! where I in Him     Might live invisible and dim!
***
Ah, fading joy, how quickly art thou past!       Yet we thy ruin haste. As if the cares of human life were few,       We seek out new: And follow fate, which would too fast pursue. See how on every bough the birds express       In their sweet notes their happiness.       They all enjoy and nothing spare; But on their mother nature lay their care. Why then should man, the lord of all below,       Such troubles choose to know As none of all his subjects undergo? Hark, hark, the waters fall, fall, fall,       And with a murmuring sound       Dash, dash upon the ground,          To gentle slumbers call.
***
Give all to love; Obey thy heart; Friends, kindred, days, Estate, good-fame, Plans, credit and the Muse,— Nothing refuse. ’T is a brave master; Let it have scope: Follow it utterly, Hope beyond hope: High and more high It dives into noon, With wing unspent, Untold intent: But it is a god, Knows its own path And the outlets of the sky. It was never for the mean; It requireth courage stout. Souls above doubt, Valor unbending, It will reward,— They shall return More than they were, And ever ascending. Leave all for love; Yet, hear me, yet, One word more thy heart behoved, One pulse more of firm endeavor,— Keep thee to-day, To-morrow, forever, Free as an Arab Of thy beloved. Cling with life to the maid; But when the surprise, First vague shadow of surmise Flits across her bosom young, Of a joy apart from thee, Free be she, fancy-free; Nor thou detain her vesture’s hem, Nor the palest rose she flung From her summer diadem. Though thou loved her as thyself, As a self of purer clay, Though her parting dims the day, Stealing grace from all alive; Heartily know, When half-gods go,   The gods arrive.
***
     To him who in the love of Nature holds   Communion with her visible forms, she speaks   A various language; for his gayer hours   She has a voice of gladness, and a smile   And eloquence of beauty, and she glides   Into his darker musings, with a mild   And healing sympathy, that steals away   Their sharpness, ere he is aware. When thoughts   Of the last bitter hour come like a blight   Over thy spirit, and sad images   Of the stern agony, and shroud, and pall,   And breathless darkness, and the narrow house,   Make thee to shudder, and grow sick at heart;—   Go forth, under the open sky, and list   To Nature’s teachings, while from all around— Earth and her waters, and the depths of air— Comes a still voice—                                        Yet a few days, and thee   The all-beholding sun shall see no more   In all his course; nor yet in the cold ground,   Where thy pale form was laid, with many tears,   Nor in the embrace of ocean, shall exist   Thy image. Earth, that nourished thee, shall claim   Thy growth, to be resolved to earth again, And, lost each human trace, surrendering up   Thine individual being, shalt thou go   To mix for ever with the elements,   To be a brother to the insensible rock   And to the sluggish clod, which the rude swain   Turns with his share, and treads upon. The oak   Shall send his roots abroad, and pierce thy mould.        Yet not to thine eternal resting-place   Shalt thou retire alone, nor couldst thou wish   Couch more magnificent. Thou shalt lie down   With patriarchs of the infant world—with kings,   The powerful of the earth—the wise, the good,   Fair forms, and hoary seers of ages past,   All in one mighty sepulchre.   The hills   Rock-ribbed and ancient as the sun,—the vales   Stretching in pensive quietness between;   The venerable woods—rivers that move   In majesty, and the complaining brooks   That make the meadows green; and, poured round all,   Old Ocean’s gray and melancholy waste,—   Are but the solemn decorations all   Of the great tomb of man. The golden sun,   The planets, all the infinite host of heaven,   Are shining on the sad abodes of death,   Through the still lapse of ages. All that tread   The globe are but a handful to the tribes   That slumber in its bosom.—Take the wings   Of morning, pierce the Barcan wilderness,   Or lose thyself in the continuous woods   Where rolls the Oregon, and hears no sound,   Save his own dashings—yet the dead are there:   And millions in those solitudes, since first   The flight of years began, have laid them down   In their last sleep—the dead reign there alone. So shalt thou rest, and what if thou withdraw   In silence from the living, and no friend   Take note of thy departure? All that breathe   Will share thy destiny. The gay will laugh When thou art gone, the solemn brood of care   Plod on, and each one as before will chase   His favorite phantom; yet all these shall leave   Their mirth and their employments, and shall come And make their bed with thee. As the long train   Of ages glide away, the sons of men,   The youth in life’s green spring, and he who goes   In the full strength of years, matron and maid,   The speechless babe, and the gray-headed man—   Shall one by one be gathered to thy side,   By those, who in their turn shall follow them.        So live, that when thy summons comes to join   The innumerable caravan, which moves   To that mysterious realm, where each shall take   His chamber in the silent halls of death,   Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night,   Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed   By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave,   Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch   About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.
***
I Fanny was younger once than she is now,     And prettier of course: I do not mean  To say that there are wrinkles on her brow;     Yet, to be candid, she is past eighteen—  Perhaps past twenty—but the girl is shy  About her age, and Heaven forbid that I  II Should get myself in trouble by revealing     A secret of this sort; I have too long  Loved pretty women with a poet’s feeling,     And when a boy, in day dream and in song,  Have knelt me down and worshipp’d them: alas!  They never thank’d me for’t—but let that pass.  V Her father kept, some fifteen years ago,     A retail dry-good shop in Chatham-street,  And nursed his little earnings, sure though slow,     Till, having muster’d wherewithal to meet  The gaze of the great world, he breathed the air  Of Pearl-street—and "set up" in Hanover-square.  VI Money is power, ’tis said—I never tried;     I’m but a poet—and bank-notes to me  Are curiosities, as closely eyed,     Whene’er I get them, as a stone would be,  Toss’d from the moon on Doctor Mitchill’s table,  Or classic brickbat from the tower of Babel.  VII But he I sing of well has known and felt     That money hath a power and a dominion;  For when in Chatham-street the good man dwelt,     No one would give a sous for his opinion.  And though his neighbours were extremely civil,  Yet, on the whole, they thought him—a poor devil,  VIII A decent kind of person; one whose head     Was not of brains particularly full;  It was not known that he had ever said     Any thing worth repeating—’twas a dull,  Good, honest man—what Paulding’s muse would call  A “cabbage head”—but he excelled them all  IX In that most noble of the sciences,     The art of making money; and he found  The zeal for quizzing him grew less and less,     As he grew richer; till upon the ground  Of Pearl-street, treading proudly in the might  And majesty of wealth, a sudden light  X Flash’d like the midnight lightning on the eyes     Of all who knew him; brilliant traits of mind,  And genius, clear and countless as the dies     Upon the peacock’s plumage; taste refined,  Wisdom and wit, were his—perhaps much more.  ’Twas strange they had not found it out before.  XXV Dear to the exile is his native land,     In memory’s twilight beauty seen afar:  Dear to the broker is a note of hand,     Collaterally secured—the polar star  Is dear at midnight to the sailor’s eyes,  And dear are Bristed’s volumes at “half price;” XXVI But dearer far to me each fairy minute     Spent in that fond forgetfulness of grief;  There is an airy web of magic in it,     As in Othello’s pocket-handkerchief,  Veiling the wrinkles on the brow of sorrow,  The gathering gloom to-day, the thunder cloud to-morrow.  XLI  Since that wise pedant, Johnson, was in fashion,     Manners have changed as well as moons; and he  Would fret himself once more into a passion,     Should he return (which heaven forbid!), and see,  How strangely from his standard dictionary,  The meaning of some words is made to vary.  XLII For instance, an undress at present means     The wearing a pelisse, a shawl, or so;  Or any thing you please, in short, that screens     The face, and hides the form from top to toe;  Of power to brave a quizzing-glass, or storm— ’Tis worn in summer, when the weather’s warm.  XLIII  But a full dress is for a winter’s night.     The most genteel is made of "woven air;"  That kind of classic cobweb, soft and light,     Which Lady Morgan’s Ida used to wear.  And ladies, this aërial manner dress'd in,  Look Eve-like, angel-like, and interesting.  
***
Nature, which is the vast creation’s soul, That steady curious agent in the whole, The art of Heaven, the order of this frame, Is only number in another name. For as some king conqu’ring what was his own, Hath choice of several titles to his crown; So harmony on this score now, that then, Yet still is all that takes and governs men. Beauty is but composure, and we find Content is but the concord of the mind, Friendship the unison of well-turned hearts, Honor the chorus of the noblest parts, And all the world on which we can reflect Music to th’ear, or to the intellect. If then each man a little world must be, How many worlds are copied out in thee, Who art so richly formed, so complete T’epitomize all that is good and great; Whose stars this brave advantage did impart, Thy nature’s as harmonious as thy art? Thou dost above the poets’ praises live, Who fetch from thee th’eternity they give. And as true reason triumphs over sense, Yet is subjected to intelligence: So poets on the lower world look down, But Lawes on them; his height is all his own. For, like Divinity it self, his lyre Rewards the wit it did at first inspire. And thus by double right poets allow  His and their laurel should adorn his brow. Live then, great soul of nature, to assuage The savage dulness of this sullen age. Charm us to sense; for though experience fail And reason too, thy numbers may prevail. Then, like those ancients, strike, and so command All nature to obey thy gen’rous hand. None will resist but such who needs will be More stupid than a stone, a fish, a tree. Be it thy care our age to new-create: What built a world may sure repair a state.
***
If honor to an ancient name be due, Or riches challenge it for one that’s new, The British language claims in either sense Both for its age, and for its opulence. But all great things must be from us removed, To be with higher reverence beloved. So landskips which in prospects distant lie, With greater wonder draw the pleasèd eye. Is not great Troy to one dark ruin hurled? Once the fam’d scene of all fighting world. Where’s Athens now, to whom Rome learning owes, And the safe laurels that adorned her brows? A strange reverse of fate she did endure, Never once greater, than she’s now obscure. Even Rome her self can but some footsteps show Of Scipio’s times, or those of Cicero. And as the Roman and the Grecian state, The British fell, the spoil of time and fate. But though the language hath the beauty lost, Yet she has still some great remains to boast. For ’twas in that, the sacred bards of old, In deathless numbers did their thoughts unfold. In groves, by rivers, and on fertile plains, They civilized and taught the listening swains; Whilst with high raptures, and as great success, Virtue they clothed in music’s charming dress. This Merlin spoke, who in his gloomy cave, Even Destiny her self seemed to enslave. For to his sight the future time was known, Much better than to others is their own; And with such state, predictions from him fell, As if he did decree, and not foretell. This spoke King Arthur, who, if fame be true, Could have compelled mankind to speak it too. In this once Boadicca valor taught, And spoke more nobly than her soldiers fought: Tell me what hero could be more than she, Who fell at once for fame and liberty? Nor could a greater sacrifice belong, Or to her children’s, or her country’s wrong. This spoke Caractacus, who was so brave, That to the Roman fortune check he gave: And when their yoke he could decline no more, He it so decently and nobly wore, That Rome her self with blushes did believe, A Britain would the law of honor give; And hastily his chains away she threw, Lest her own captive else should her subdue.
***
I did not live until this time     Crowned my felicity, When I could say without a crime,     I am not thine, but thee. This carcass breathed, and walked, and slept,     So that the world believed  There was a soul the motions kept;     But they were all deceived. For as a watch by art is wound     To motion, such was mine: But never had Orinda found     A soul till she found thine; Which now inspires, cures and supplies,     And guides my darkened breast: For thou art all that I can prize,     My joy, my life, my rest. No bridegroom’s nor crown-conqueror’s mirth     To mine compared can be: They have but pieces of the earth,     I’ve all the world in thee. Then let our flames still light and shine,     And no false fear control, As innocent as our design,     Immortal as our soul.
***
These little limbs,     These eyes and hands which here I find, These rosy cheeks wherewith my life begins,     Where have ye been? behind What curtain were ye from me hid so long? Where was, in what abyss, my speaking tongue?          When silent I       So many thousand, thousand years Beneath the dust did in a chaos lie,     How could I smiles or tears, Or lips or hands or eyes or ears perceive? Welcome ye treasures which I now receive.          I that so long     Was nothing from eternity, Did little think such joys as ear or tongue     To celebrate or see: Such sounds to hear, such hands to feel, such feet, Beneath the skies on such a ground to meet.          New burnished joys,     Which yellow gold and pearls excel! Such sacred treasures are the limbs in boys,     In which a soul doth dwell; Their organizèd joints and azure veins More wealth include than all the world contains.          From dust I rise,     And out of nothing now awake; These brighter regions which salute mine eyes,     A gift from God I take. The earth, the seas, the light, the day, the skies, The sun and stars are mine if those I prize.          Long time before     I in my mother’s womb was born, A God, preparing, did this glorious store,     The world, for me adorn. Into this Eden so divine and fair, So wide and bright, I come His son and heir.          A stranger here     Strange things doth meet, strange glories see; Strange treasures lodged in this fair world appear,     Strange all and new to me; But that they mine should be, who nothing was, That strangest is of all, yet brought to pass.
***
To the same purpose: he, not long before   Brought home from nurse, going to the door      To do some little thing      He must not do within,           With wonder cries,           As in the skiesHe saw the moon, “O yonder is the moon,   Newly come after me to town,That shined at Lugwardin but yesternight,   Where I enjoyed the self-same sight.”As if it had ev’n twenty thousand faces,   It shines at once in many places;      To all the earth so wide      God doth the stars divide,           With so much art           The moon impart,They serve us all; serve wholly every one   As if they servèd him alone.While every single person hath such store,   ’Tis want of sense that makes us poor.
***
I always say I won't go back to the mountains I am too old and fat there are bugs mean mules And pancakes every morning of the world Mr. Edward Wyman (63) Steams along the trail ahead of us all Moaning, "My poor feet ache, my back Is tired and I've got a stiff prick" Uprooting alder shoots in the rain Then I'm alone in a glass house on a ridge Encircled by chiming mountains With one sun roaring through the house all day & the others crashing through the glass all night Conscious even while sleeping     Morning fog in the southern gorge     Gleaming foam restoring the old sea-level     The lakes in two lights green soap and indigo     The high cirque-lake black half-open eye Ptarmigan hunt for bugs in the snow Bear peers through the wall at noon Deer crowd up to see the lamp A mouse nearly drowns in the honey I see my bootprints mingle with deer-foot Bear-paw mule-shoe in the dusty path to the privy Much later I write down:     "raging. Viking sunrise     The gorgeous death of summer in the east!" (Influence of a Byronic landscape— Bent pages exhibiting depravity of style.) Outside the lookout I lay nude on the granite Mountain hot September sun but inside my head Calm dark night with all the other stars HERACLITUS: "The waking have one common world But the sleeping turn aside Each into a world of his own." I keep telling myself what I really like Are music, books, certain land and sea-scapes The way light falls across them, diffusion of Light through agate, light itself . . . I suppose I'm still afraid of the dark     "Remember smart-guy there's something     Bigger something smarter than you."     Ireland's fear of unknown holies drives     My father's voice (a country neither he     Nor his great-grandfather ever saw)     A sparkly tomb a plated grave     A holy thumb beneath a wave Everything else they hauled across Atlantic Scattered and lost in the buffalo plains Among these trees and mountains From Duns Scotus to this page A thousand years     (". . . a dog walking on this hind legs—     not that he does it well but that he       does it at all.") Virtually a blank except for the hypothesis That there is more to a man Than the contents of his jock-strap EMPEDOCLES: "At one time all the limbs Which are the body's portion are brought together By Love in blooming life's high season; at another Severed by cruel Strife, they wander each alone By the breakers of life's sea." Fire and pressure from the sun bear down Bear down centipede shadow of palm-frond A limestone lithograph—oysters and clams of stone Half a black rock bomb displaying brilliant crystals Fire and pressure Love and Strife bear down Brontosaurus, look away My sweat runs down the rock HERACLITUS: "The transformations of fire are, first of all, sea; and half of the sea is earth, half whirlwind. . . . It scatters and it gathers; it advances and retires." I move out of a sweaty pool        (The sea!) And sit up higher on the rock Is anything burning? The sun itself! Dying Pooping out, exhausted Having produced brontosaurus, Heraclitus This rock, me, To no purpose I tell you anyway (as a kind of loving) . . . Flies & other insects come from miles around To listen I also address the rock, the heather, The alpine fir BUDDHA: "All the constituents of being are Transitory: Work out your salvation with diligence." (And everything, as one eminent disciple of that master Pointed out, had been tediously complex ever since.) There was a bird Lived in an egg And by ingenious chemistry Wrought molecules of albumen To beak and eye Gizzard and craw Feather and claw My grandmother said: "Look at them poor bed- raggled pigeons!" And the sign in McAlister Street:             "IF YOU CAN'T COME IN             SMILE AS YOU GO BY                    LOVE                THE BUTCHER I destroy myself, the universe (an egg) And time—to get an answer: There are a smiler, a sleeper and a dancer We repeat the conversation in the glittering dark Floating beside the sleeper. The child remarks, "You knew it all the time." I: "I keep forgetting that the smiler is Sleeping; the sleeper, dancing." From Sauk Lookout two years before Some of the view was down the Skagit To Puget Sound: From above the lower ranges, Deep in the forest—lighthouses on clear nights. This year's rock is a spur from the main range Cuts the valley in two and is broken By the river; Ross Dam repairs the break, Makes trolley buses run Through the streets of dim Seattle far away. I'm surrounded by mountains here A circle of 108 beads, originally seeds     of ficus religiosa           Bo-Tree A circle, continuous, one odd bead Larger than the rest and bearing A tassel (hair-tuft) (the man who sat              under the tree) In the center of the circle, a void, an empty figure containing All that's multiplied; Each bead a repetition, a world Of ignorance and sleep. Today is the day the goose gets cooked Day of liberation for the crumbling flower Knobcone pinecone in the flames Brandy in the sun Which, as I said, will disappear Anyway it'll be invisible soon Exchanging places with stars now in my head To be growing rice in China through the night. Magnetic storms across the solar plains Make Aurora Borealis shimmy bright Beyond the mountains to the north. Closing the lookout in the morning Thick ice on the shutters Coyote almost whistling on a nearby ridge The mountain is THERE (between two lakes) I brought back a piece of its rock Heavy dark-honey color With a seam of crystal, some of the quartz Stained by its matrix Practically indestructible A shift from opacity to brilliance (The Zenbos say, "Lightening-flash & flint-spark") Like the mountains where it was made What we see of the world is the mind's Invention and the mind Though stained by it, becoming Rivers, sun, mule-dung, flies— Can shift instantly A dirty bird in a square time Gone Gone REALLY gone Into the cool O MAMA! Like they say, "Four times up, Three times down." I'm still on the mountain.
***
Far from the tender Tribe of Boys remove,For they’ve a thousand ways to kindle Love.This, pleases as he strides the manag’d Horse,And holds the taughten’d Rein with early Force;This, as he swims, delights thy Fancy best,Raising the smiling Wave with snowy Breast:This, with a comely Look and manly Airs;And that with Virgin Modesty ensnares.But if at first you find him not inclin’dTo Love, have Patience, Time will change his Mind.                    *      And you, what’er your Fav’rite does, approve,For Condescension leads the Way to love.Go with him where he goes, tho’ long the Way,And the fierce Dog-star fires the sultry Day;Or the gay Rainbow girds the bluish Sky,And threatens rattling Show’rs of Rain are nigh.If sailing on the Water by his Will,Then steer the Wherry with a dext’rous Skill:Nor think it hard Fatigues and Pains to bear,But still be ready with a willing Cheer.If he’ll inclose the Vales for savage Spoils,Then on thy Shoulders bear the Nets and Toils;If Fencing be the Fav’rite Sport he’ll use, Take up the Files, and artlessly oppose;Seem as intent, yet oft expose your Breast,Neglect your Guard, and let him get the best;Then he’ll be mild, then you a Kiss may seize,He’ll struggle, but at length comply with ease;Reluctant, tho’ at first you’ll find him growEv’n fond, when round your Neck his Arms he’ll throw. 
***
In unexperienced infancy Many a sweet mistake doth lie: Mistake though false, intending true; A seeming somewhat more than view;          That doth instruct the mind          In things that lie behind, And many secrets to us show Which afterwards we come to know. Thus did I by the water’s brink Another world beneath me think; And while the lofty spacious skies Reversèd there, abused mine eyes,          I fancied other feet          Came mine to touch or meet; As by some puddle I did play Another world within it lay. Beneath the water people drowned, Yet with another heaven crowned, In spacious regions seemed to go As freely moving to and fro:          In bright and open space          I saw their very face; Eyes, hands, and feet they had like mine; Another sun did with them shine. ’Twas strange that people there should walk, And yet I could not hear them talk; That through a little watery chink, Which one dry ox or horse might drink,          We other worlds should see,          Yet not admitted be; And other confines there behold Of light and darkness, heat and cold. I called them oft, but called in vain; No speeches we could entertain: Yet did I there expect to find Some other world, to please my mind.          I plainly saw by these          A new antipodes, Whom, though they were so plainly seen, A film kept off that stood between. By walking men’s reversèd feet I chanced another world to meet; Though it did not to view exceed A phantom, ’tis a world indeed,          Where skies beneath us shine,          And earth by art divine Another face presents below, Where people’s feet against ours go. Within the regions of the air, Compassed about with heavens fair, Great tracts of land there may be found Enriched with fields and fertile ground;          Where many numerous hosts          In those far distant coasts, For other great and glorious ends Inhabit, my yet unknown friends. O ye that stand upon the brink, Whom I so near me through the chink With wonder see: what faces there, Whose feet, whose bodies, do ye wear?          I my companions see          In you, another me. They seemèd others, but are we; Our second selves these shadows be. Look how far off those lower skies Extend themselves! scarce with mine eyes I can them reach. O ye my friends, What secret borders on those ends?          Are lofty heavens hurled ’Bout your inferior world? Are yet the representatives Of other peoples’ distant lives? Of all the playmates which I knew That here I do the image view In other selves, what can it mean? But that below the purling stream          Some unknown joys there be          Laid up in store for me; To which I shall, when that thin skin Is broken, be admitted in.
***
Mourn, mourn, ye Muses, all your loss deplore, The young, the noble Strephon is no more. Yes, yes, he fled quick as departing light, And ne’er shall rise from Death’s eternal night, So rich a prize the Stygian gods ne’er bore, Such wit, such beauty, never graced their shore. He was but lent this duller world t’ improve In all the charms of poetry, and love; Both were his gift, which freely he bestowed, And like a god, dealt to the wond’ring crowd. Scorning the little vanity of fame, Spight of himself attained a glorious name. But oh! in vain was all his peevish pride, The sun as soon might his vast luster hide, As piercing, pointed, and more lasting bright, As suffering no vicissitudes of night.    Mourn, mourn, ye Muses, all your loss deplore,    The young, the noble Strephon is no more. Now uninspired upon your banks we lie, Unless when we would mourn his elegy; His name’s a genius that would wit dispense, And give the theme a soul, the words a sense. But all fine thought that ravisht when it spoke, With the soft youth eternal leave has took; Uncommon wit that did the soul o’ercome, Is buried all in Strephon’s worshipped tomb; Satire has lost its art, its sting is gone, The Fop and Cully now may be undone; That dear instructing rage is now allayed, And no sharp pen dares tell ’em how they’ve strayed; Bold as a god was ev’ry lash he took, But kind and gentle the chastizing stroke.     Mourn, mourn, ye youths, whom fortune has betrayed,     The last reproacher of your vice is dead. Mourn, all ye beauties, put your Cyprus on, The truest swain that e’re adored you’s gone; Think how he loved, and writ, and sighed, and spoke, Recall his mien, his fashion, and his look. By what dear arts the soul he did surprise, Soft as his voice, and charming as his eyes. Bring garlands all of never-dying flowers, Bedewed with everlasting falling showers; Fix your fair eyes upon your victimed slave, Sent gay and young to his untimely grave. See where the noble swain extended lies, Too sad a triumph of your victories; Adorned with all the graces Heaven e’er lent, All that was great, soft, lovely, excellent You’ve laid into his early monument.     Mourn, mourn, ye beauties, your sad loss deplore,     The young, the charming Strephon is no more. Mourn, all ye little gods of love, whose darts Have lost their wonted power of piercing hearts; Lay by the gilded quiver and the bow, The useless toys can do no mischief now, Those eyes that all your arrows’ points inspired, Those lights that gave ye fire are now retired, Cold as his tomb, pale as your mother’s doves; Bewail him then oh all ye little loves, For you the humblest votary have lost That ever your divinities could boast; Upon your hands your weeping heads decline, And let your wings encompass round his shrine; In stead of flowers your broken arrows strow, And at his feet lay the neglected bow.          Mourn, all ye little gods, your loss deplore,          The soft, the charming Strephon is no more. Large was his fame, but short his glorious race, Like young Lucretius lived and died apace. So early roses fade, so over all They cast their fragrant scents, then softly fall, While all the scattered perfumed leaves declare, How lovely ’twas when whole, how sweet, how fair. Had he been to the Roman Empire known, When great Augustus filled the peaceful throne; Had he the noble wond’rous poet seen, And known his genius, and surveyed his mien, (When wits, and heroes graced divine abodes), He had increased the number of their gods; The royal judge had temples rear’d to’s name, And made him as immortal as his fame; In love and verse his Ovid he’ad out-done, And all his laurels, and his Julia won.     Mourn, mourn, unhappy world, his loss deplore,     The great, the charming Strephon is no more.
***
A thousand martyrs I have made,    All sacrificed to my desire; A thousand beauties have betrayed,    That languish in resistless fire. The untamed heart to hand I brought, And fixed the wild and wandering thought. I never vowed nor sighed in vain    But both, though false, were well received. The fair are pleased to give us pain,    And what they wish is soon believed. And though I talked of wounds and smart, Love’s pleasures only touched my heart. Alone the glory and the spoil    I always laughing bore away; The triumphs, without pain or toil,    Without the hell, the heav’n of joy. And while I thus at random rove Despise the fools that whine for love.
***
As some brave admiral, in former war    Deprived of force, but pressed with courage still, Two rival fleets appearing from afar,    Crawls to the top of an adjacent hill; From whence, with thoughts full of concern, he views    The wise and daring conduct of the fight, Whilst each bold action to his mind renews    His present glory and his past delight; From his fierce eyes flashes of fire he throws,    As from black clouds when lightning breaks away; Transported, thinks himself amidst the foes,    And absent, yet enjoys the bloody day; So, when my days of impotence approach,    And I’m by pox and wine’s unlucky chance Forced from the pleasing billows of debauch    On the dull shore of lazy temperance, My pains at least some respite shall afford    While I behold the battles you maintain When fleets of glasses sail about the board,    From whose broadsides volleys of wit shall rain. Nor let the sight of honorable scars,    Which my too forward valor did procure, Frighten new-listed soldiers from the wars:    Past joys have more than paid what I endure. Should any youth (worth being drunk) prove nice,    And from his fair inviter meanly shrink, ’Twill please the ghost of my departed vice    If, at my counsel, he repent and drink. Or should some cold-complexioned sot forbid,    With his dull morals, our bold night-alarms, I’ll fire his blood by telling what I did    When I was strong and able to bear arms. I’ll tell of whores attacked, their lords at home;    Bawds’ quarters beaten up, and fortress won; Windows demolished, watches overcome;    And handsome ills by my contrivance done. Nor shall our love-fits, Chloris, be forgot,    When each the well-looked linkboy strove t’ enjoy, And the best kiss was the deciding lot    Whether the boy fucked you, or I the boy. With tales like these I will such thoughts inspire    As to important mischief shall incline: I’ll make him long some ancient church to fire,    And fear no lewdness he’s called to by wine. Thus, statesmanlike, I’ll saucily impose,    And safe from action, valiantly advise; Sheltered in impotence, urge you to blows,    And being good for nothing else, be wise.
***
Naked she lay, clasped in my longing arms, I filled with love, and she all over charms; Both equally inspired with eager fire, Melting through kindness, flaming in desire. With arms, legs, lips close clinging to embrace, She clips me to her breast, and sucks me to her face. Her nimble tongue, love’s lesser lightning, played Within my mouth, and to my thoughts conveyed Swift orders that I should prepare to throw The all-dissolving thunderbolt below. My fluttering soul, sprung with the pointed kiss, Hangs hovering o’er her balmy brinks of bliss. But whilst her busy hand would guide that part Which should convey my soul up to her heart, In liquid raptures I dissolve all o’er, Melt into sperm, and spend at every pore. A touch from any part of her had done ’t: Her hand, her foot, her very look's a cunt.    Smiling, she chides in a kind murmuring noise, And from her body wipes the clammy joys, When, with a thousand kisses wandering o’er My panting bosom, “Is there then no more?” She cries. “All this to love and rapture’s due; Must we not pay a debt to pleasure too?”     But I, the most forlorn, lost man alive, To show my wished obedience vainly strive: I sigh, alas! and kiss, but cannot swive. Eager desires confound my first intent, Succeeding shame does more success prevent, And rage at last confirms me impotent. Ev’n her fair hand, which might bid heat return To frozen age, and make cold hermits burn, Applied to my dear cinder, warms no more Than fire to ashes could past flames restore. Trembling, confused, despairing, limber, dry, A wishing, weak, unmoving lump I lie. This dart of love, whose piercing point, oft tried, With virgin blood ten thousand maids has dyed, Which nature still directed with such art That it through every cunt reached every heart— Stiffly resolved, ’twould carelessly invade Woman or man, nor ought its fury stayed: Where’er it pierced, a cunt it found or made— Now languid lies in this unhappy hour, Shrunk up and sapless like a withered flower.     Thou treacherous, base deserter of my flame, False to my passion, fatal to my fame, Through what mistaken magic dost thou prove So true to lewdness, so untrue to love? What oyster-cinder-beggar-common whore Didst thou e’er fail in all thy life before? When vice, disease, and scandal lead the way, With what officious haste doest thou obey! Like a rude, roaring hector in the streets Who scuffles, cuffs, and justles all he meets, But if his king or country claim his aid, The rakehell villain shrinks and hides his head; Ev’n so thy brutal valor is displayed, Breaks every stew, does each small whore invade, But when great Love the onset does command, Base recreant to thy prince, thou dar’st not stand. Worst part of me, and henceforth hated most, Through all the town a common fucking post, On whom each whore relieves her tingling cunt As hogs on gates do rub themselves and grunt, Mayst thou to ravenous chancres be a prey, Or in consuming weepings waste away; May strangury and stone thy days attend; May’st thou never piss, who didst refuse to spend When all my joys did on false thee depend.    And may ten thousand abler pricks agree    To do the wronged Corinna right for thee.
***
I swive as well as others do, I’m young, not yet deformed, My tender heart, sincere, and true, Deserves not to be scorned. Why Phyllis then, why will you swive, With forty lovers more? Can I (said she) with Nature strive, Alas I am, alas I am a whore. Were all my body larded o’er, With darts of love, so thick, That you might find in ev’ry pore, A well stuck standing prick; Whilst yet my eyes alone were free, My heart, would never doubt, In am’rous rage, and ecstasy, To wish those eyes, to wish those eyes fucked out.
***
Ancient person, for whom IAll the flattering youth defy,Long be it ere thou grow old,Aching, shaking, crazy, cold;  But still continue as thou art,  Ancient person of my heart.On thy withered lips and dry,Which like barren furrows lie,Brooding kisses I will pourShall thy youthful [heat] restore(Such kind showers in autumn fall,And a second spring recall);  Nor from thee will ever part,  Ancient person of my heart.Thy nobler part, which but to nameIn our sex would be counted shame,By age’s frozen grasp possessed,From [his] ice shall be released,And soothed by my reviving hand,In former warmth and vigor stand.All a lover’s wish can reachFor thy joy my love shall teach,And for they pleasure shall improveAll that art can add to love.  Yet still I love thee without art,  Ancient person of my heart.
***
Once there came a man Who said:  “Range me all men of the world in rows.” And instantly  There was a terrific clamor among the people Against being ranged in rows. There was a loud quarrel, world-wide. It endured for ages; And blood was shed By those who would not stand in rows, And by those who pined to stand in rows. Eventually, the man went to death, weeping. And those who stayed in the bloody scuffle Knew not the great simplicity. 
***
Down the long hall she glistens like a star,The foam-born mother of Love, transfixed to stone,Yet none the less immortal, breathing on.Time's brutal hand hath maimed but could not mar.When first the enthralled enchantress from afarDazzled mine eyes, I saw not her alone,Serenely poised on her world-worshipped throne,As when she guided once her dove-drawn car,—But at her feet a pale, death-stricken Jew,Her life adorer, sobbed farewell to love.Here Heine wept! Here still he weeps anew,Nor ever shall his shadow lift or move,While mourns one ardent heart, one poet-brain,For vanished Hellas and Hebraic pain.
***
from Sonnets, First Series                VIDank fens of cedar; hemlock-branches grayWith trees and trail of mosses, wringing-wet;Beds of the black pitchpine in dead leaves setWhose wasted red has wasted to white away;Remnants of rain and droppings of decay, —Why hold ye so my heart, nor dimly letThrough your deep leaves the light of yesterday,The faded glimmer of a sunshine set?Is it that in your darkness, shut from strife,The bread of tears becomes the bread of life?Far from the roar of day, beneath your boughsFresh griefs beat tranquilly, and loves and vowsGrow green in your gray shadows, dearer farEven than all lovely lights and roses are?
***
Fear me, virgin whosoever Taking pride from love exempt, Fear me, slighted. Never, never Brave me, nor my fury tempt: Downy wings, but wroth they beat Tempest even in reason's seat.***
I saw the spot where our first parents dwelt;  And yet it wore to me no face of change,  For while amid its fields and groves, I felt  As if I had not sinned, nor thought it strange;  My eye seemed but a part of every sight,  My ear heard music in each sound that rose; Each sense forever found a new delight,  Such as the spirit’s vision only knows;  Each act some new and ever-varying joy  Did my Father’s love for me prepare;  To dress the spot my ever fresh employ,  And in the glorious whole with Him to share;  No more without the flaming gate to stray,  No more for sin’s dark stain the debt of death to pay. 
***
Thou wast that all to me, love,  For which my soul did pine—A green isle in the sea, love,  A fountain and a shrine,All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers,  And all the flowers were mine.Ah, dream too bright to last!  Ah, starry Hope! that didst ariseBut to be overcast!  A voice from out the Future cries,“On! on!”—but o’er the Past  (Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering liesMute, motionless, aghast!For, alas! alas! with me  The light of Life is o’er!No more—no more—no more—  (Such language holds the solemn seaTo the sands upon the shore)  Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree,Or the stricken eagle soar!And all my days are trances,  And all my nightly dreamsAre where thy grey eye glances,  And where thy footstep gleams—In what ethereal dances,  By what eternal streams.
***
A month or twain to live on honeycomb    Is pleasant; but one tires of scented time,    Cold sweet recurrence of accepted rhyme, And that strong purple under juice and foam Where the wine’s heart has burst; Nor feel the latter kisses like the first. Once yet, this poor one time; I will not pray    Even to change the bitterness of it,     The bitter taste ensuing on the sweet, To make your tears fall where your soft hair lay All blurred and heavy in some perfumed wise Over my face and eyes. And yet who knows what end the scythèd wheat    Makes of its foolish poppies’ mouths of red?    These were not sown, these are not harvested, They grow a month and are cast under feet  And none has care thereof, As none has care of divided love. I know each shadow of your lips by rote,    Each change of love in eyelids and eyebrows;    The fashion of fair temples tremulous With tender blood, and colour of your throat; I know not how love is gone out of this, Seeing that all was his. Love’s likeness there endures upon all these:    But out of these one shall not gather love.    Day hath not strength nor the night shade enough To make love whole and fill his lips with ease, As some bee-builded cell Feels at filled lips the heavy honey swell. I know not how this last month leaves your hair    Less full of purple colour and hid spice,    And that luxurious trouble of closed eyes Is mixed with meaner shadows and waste care; And love, kissed out by pleasure, seems not yet Worth patience to regret.  
***
So, so breake off this last lamenting kisse,     Which sucks two soules, and vapours Both away, Turne thou ghost that way, and let mee turne this,     And let our selves benight our happiest day, We ask’d none leave to love; nor will we owe     Any, so cheape a death, as saying, Goe; Goe; and if that word have not quite kil’d thee,      Ease mee with death, by bidding mee goe too. Oh, if it have, let my word worke on mee,     And a just office on a murderer doe. Except it be too late, to kill me so,     Being double dead, going, and bidding, goe.  
***
Either she was foul, or her attire was bad,Or she was not the wench I wished t’have had.Idly I lay with her, as if I loved not,And like a burden grieved the bed that moved not.Yet though both of us performed our true intent,Yet I could not cast anchor where I meant.She on my neck her ivory arms did throw,Her arms far whiter than the Scythian snow.And eagerly she kissed me with her tongue,And under mine her wanton thigh she flung.Yea, and she soothed me up and called me sir,And used all speech that might provoke and stir.Yet, like as if cold hemlock I had drunk,It mockèd me, hung down the head, and sunk.Like a dull cipher or rude block I lay,Or shade or body was I, who can say?What will my age do, age I cannot shun,When in my prime my force is spent and done?I blush, that being youthful, hot and lusty,I prove neither youth nor man, but old and rusty.Pure rose she, like a nun to sacrifice,Or one that with her tender brother lies.Yet boarded I the golden Chie twice,And Libas, and the white-cheeked Pitho thrice.Corinna craved it in a summer’s night,And nine sweet bouts we had before daylight.What, waste my limbs through some Thessalian charms?May spells and drugs do silly souls such harm?With virgin wax hath some imbaste my jointsAnd pierced my liver with sharp needles’ points?Charms change corn to grass and make it die.By charms are running spring and fountains dry.By charms mast crops from oaks, from vines grapes fall,And fruit from trees when there’s no wind at all.Why might not then my sinews be enchanted,And I grow faint, as with some spirit haunted?To this add shame: shame to perform it quailed meAnd was the second cause why vigour failed me.My idle thoughts delighted her no moreThan did the robe or garment which she wore.Yet might her touch make youthful Pylius fireAnd Tithon livelier than his years require.Even her I had, and she had me in vain;What might I crave more if I asked again?I think the great gods grieved they had bestowedThe benefit which lewdly I for-slowed.I wished to be received in. In I get meTo kiss. I kiss. To lie with her, she let me.Why was I blessed? Why made king to refuse it?Chuff-like had I not gold and could not use it?So in a spring thrives he that told so much, And looks upon the fruits he cannot touch.Hath any rose so from a fresh young maid,As she might straight have gone to church and prayed?Well I believe she kissed not as she should,Nor used the sleight and cunning which she could.Huge oaks, hard adamants might she have moved,And with sweet words cause deaf rocks to have loved.Worthy she was to move both gods and men,But neither was I man, nor lived then.Can deaf ear take delight when Phaemius sings?Or Thamiras in curious painted things?What sweet thought is there but I had the same?And one gave place still as another came.Yet, notwithstanding, like one dead it lay,Drooping more than a rose pulled yesterday.Now, when he should not jet, he bolts uprightAnd craves his task, and seeks to be at fight.Lie down with shame, and see thou stir no more,Seeing thou wouldst deceive me as before.Thou cozenest me, by thee surprised am I, And bide sore loss with endless infamy.Nay more, the wench did not disdain a whitTo take it in her hand and play with it.But when she saw it would by no means stand,But still drooped down, regarding not her hand,‘Why mockst thou me?’ she cried. ‘Or, being ill,Who bade thee lie down here against thy will?Either thou art witch, with blood of frogs new dead,Or jaded camest thou from some other bed.’With that, her loose gown on, from me she cast her –In skipping out her naked feet much graced her.And, lest her maid should know of this disgrace,To cover it, spilt water on the place. 
***
‘’Tis no sin for a man to labour in his vocation.’ -Falstaff‘The night cometh, when no man can work.’What though the beauty I love and serve be cheap,  Ought you to take me for a beast or fool?All things a man could wish are in her keep;  For her I turn swashbuckler in love’s school.  When folk drop in, I take my pot and stoolAnd fall to drinking with no more ado.I fetch them bread, fruit, cheese, and water, too;  I say all’s right so long as I’m well paid;‘Look in again when your flesh troubles you,  Inside this brothel where we drive our trade.’But soon the devil’s among us flesh and fell,  When penniless to bed comes Madge my whore;I loathe the very sight of her like hell.  I snatch gown, girdle, surcoat, all she wore,  And tell her, these shall stand against her score.She grips her hips with both hands, cursing God,Swearing by Jesus’ body, bones, and blood,  That they shall not. Then I, no whit dismayed,Cross her cracked nose with some stray shiver of wood  Inside this brothel where we drive our trade.When all’s made up she drops me a windy word,  Bloat like a beetle puffed and poisonous:Grins, thumps my pate, and calls me dickey-bird,  And cuffs me with a fist that’s ponderous.  We sleep like logs, being drunken both of us;Then when we wake her womb begins to stir;To save her seed she gets me under her  Wheezing and whining, flat as planks are laid:And thus she spoils me for a whoremonger  Inside this brothel where we drive our trade.Blow, hail or freeze, I’ve bread here baked rent free!Whoring’s my trade, and my whore pleases me;  Bad cat, bad rat; we’re just the same if weighed.We that love filth, filth follows us, you see;Honour flies from us, as from her we flee  Inside this brothel where we drive our trade.            I bequeath likewise to fat Madge              This little song to learn and study;            By god’s head she’s a sweet fat fadge,              Devout and soft of flesh and ruddy;            I love her with my soul and body,            So doth she me, sweet dainty thing.              If you fall in with such a lady,            Read it, and give it her to sing. 
***
In the close covert of a groveBy nature formed for scenes of love,Said Susan in a lucky hour:‘Observe yon sweet geranium flower.How straight upon its stalk it stands,And tempts our violating hands,Whilst the soft bud, as yet unspread,Hangs down its pale declining head.Yet soon as it is ripe to blow,The stems shall rise, the head shall glow.’‘Nature,’ said I, ‘my lovely Sue,To all her followers lends a clue.Her simple laws themselves explainAs links of one continued chain;For her the mysteries of creationAre but the works of generation.Yon blushing, strong, triumphant flowerIs in the crisis of its power:But short, alas, its vigorous reign;He sheds his seed, and drops again.The bud that hangs in pale decayFeels not, as yet, the plastic ray.Tomorrow’s sun shall bid him rise,Then, too, he sheds his seed, and dies.But words, my love, are vain and weak; For proof, let bright example speak.’Then straight before the wondering maidThe tree of life I gently laid.‘Observe, sweet Sue, his drooping head,How pale, how languid, and how dead.Yet let the sun of thy bright eyesShine but a moment, it shall rise.Let but the dew of thy soft handRefresh the stem, it straight shall stand.Already, see, it swells, it grows,Its head is redder than the rose,Its shriveled fruit, of dusky hue,Now glows—a present fit for Sue.The balm of life each artery fills,And in o’erflowing drops distils.’‘Oh, me!’ cried Susan, ‘When is this?What strange tumultuous throbs of bliss!Sure, never mortal till this hourFelt such emotion at a flower!Oh, serpent, cunning to deceive,Sure ’tis this tree that tempted Eve.The crimson apples hang so fairAlas! what woman could forbear?’‘Well hast thou guessed, my love,’ I cried,‘It is the tree by which she died –The tree which could alone content her.All nature, Susan, seeks the centre.Yet let us still poor Eve forgive,It’s the tree by which we live.For lovely women still it grows,And in the centre only blows.But chief for thee it spreads its charms,For paradise is in thy arms …’I ceased, for nature kindly hereBegan to whisper in her ear,And lovely Sue lay softly pantingWhile the geranium tree was planting,’Til in the heat of amorous strifeShe burst the mellow tree of life.‘Oh, heaven!’ cried Susan with a sigh,‘The hour we taste – we surely die.Strange raptures seize my fainting frame,And all my body glows with flame.Yet let me snatch one parting kissTo tell my love I die with bliss –That pleased thy Susan yields her breath;Oh, who would live, if this be death?’
***
No, no; for my virginity,   When I lose that, says Rose, I’ll die:Behind the elms, last night, cried Dick,   Rose, were you not extremely sick?
***
Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under, Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,Swelling on either side to want his bliss;Between whose hills her head entombed is;   Where like a virtuous monument she lies,   To be admired of lewd unhallowed eyes.Without the bed her other fair hand was,On the green coverlet, whose perfect whiteShowed like an April daisy on the grass,With pearly sweat resembling dew of night.Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light,   And canopied in darkness sweetly lay   Till they might open to adorn the day.Her hair like golden threads played with her breathO modest wantons, wanton modesty!Showing life’s triumph in the map of death,And death’s dim look in life’s mortality.Each in her sleep themselves so beautify   As if between them twain there were no strife,   But that life lived in death, and death in life.Her breasts like ivory globes circled with blue,A pair of maiden worlds unconquerèd,Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,And him by oath they truly honourèd.These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred,   Who like a foul usurper went about   From this fair throne to heave the owner out.What could he see but mightily he noted?What did he note but strongly he desired?What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,And in his will his willful eye he tired.With more than admiration he admired   Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,   Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.As the grim lion fawneth o’er his preySharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,So o’er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,His rage of lust by gazing qualified;Slacked, not suppressed; for, standing by her side,   His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,   Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins.And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting.In bloody death and ravishment delighting,Nor children’s tears nor mothers’ groans respecting,Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting.   Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,   Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,His eye commends the leading to his hand;His hand, as proud of such a dignity,Smoking with pride, marched on to make his standOn her bare breast, the heart of all her land,   Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,   Left their round turrets destitute and pale.They, mustering to the quiet cabinetWhere their dear governess and lady lies,Do tell her she is dreadfully besetAnd fright her with confusion of their cries.She, much amazed, breaks ope her locked-up eyes,   Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,   Are by his flaming torch dimmed and controlled.Imagine her as one in dead of nightFrom forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking.What terror ‘tis! but she, in worser taking,   From sleep disturbèd, heedfully doth view   The sight which makes supposèd terror true.Wrapped and confounded in a thousand fears,Like to a new-killed bird she trembling lies.She dares not look; yet, winking, there appearsQuick-shifting antics ugly in her eyes.Such shadows are the weak brain’s forgeries,   Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,   In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.His hand, that yet remains upon her breast(Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!)May feel her heart (poor citizen) distressed,Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.   This moves in him more rage and lesser pity,   To make the breach and enter this sweet city. 
***
I see a beautiful gigantic swimmer swimming naked through the eddies of the sea, His brown hair lies close and even to his head, he strikes out with courageous arms, he urges himself with his legs, I see his white body, I see his undaunted eyes, I hate the swift-running eddies that would dash him head-foremost on the rocks. What are you doing you ruffianly red-trickled waves? Will you kill the courageous giant? will you kill him in the prime of his middle-age? Steady and long he struggles, He is baffled, bang’d, bruis’d, he holds out while his strength holds out, The slapping eddies are spotted with his blood, they bear him away, they roll him, swing him, turn him, His beautiful body is borne in the circling eddies, it is continually bruis’d on rocks, Swiftly and out of sight is borne the brave corpse. 
***
O tan-faced prairie-boy,Before you came to camp came many a welcome gift,Praises and presents came and nourishing food, till at last among the recruits,You came, taciturn, with nothing to give – we but look’d on each other,When lo! more than all the gifts of the world you gave me. 
***
A glimpse through an interstice caught,Of a crowd of workmen and drivers in a bar-room around the stove late of a winter night, and I unremark’d seated in a corner,Of a youth who loves me and whom I love, silently approaching and seating himself near, that he may hold me by the hand,A long while amid the noises of coming and going, of drinking and oath and smutty jest,There we two, content, happy in being together, speaking little, perhaps not a word.
***
Fair lovely Maid, or if that Title be Too weak, too Feminine for Nobler thee, Permit a Name that more Approaches Truth: And let me call thee, Lovely Charming Youth. This last will justifie my soft complainte, While that may serve to lessen my constraint; And without Blushes I the Youth persue, When so much beauteous Woman is in view Against thy Charms we struggle but in vain With thy deluding Form thou giv’st us pain, While the bright Nymph betrays us to the Swain. In pity to our Sex sure thou wer’t sent, That we might Love, and yet be Innocent: For sure no Crime with thee we can commit; Or if we shou’d – thy Form excuses it. For who, that gathers fairest Flowers believes A Snake lies hid beneath the Fragrant Leaves.     Thou beauteous Wonder of a different kind, Soft Cloris with the dear Alexis join’d; When e’er the Manly part of thee, wou’d plead Thou tempts us with the Image of the Maid, While we the noblest Passions do extend The Love to Hermes, Aphrodite the Friend.  
***
Out of your whole life give but one moment!All of your life that has gone before,All to come after it, – so you ignore,So you make perfect the present, – condense,In a rapture of rage, for perfection’s endowment,Thought and feeling and soul and sense –Merged in a moment which gives me at lastYou around me for once, you beneath me, above me – Me – sure that despite of time future, time past, –This tick of our life-time’s one moment you love me!How long such suspension may linger? Ah, Sweet –The moment eternal – just that and no more – When ecstasy’s utmost we clutch at the coreWhile cheeks burn, arms open, eyes shut and lips meet!
***
She lay all naked in her bed,   And I myself lay by;No veil but curtains about her spread,   No covering but I:Her head upon her shoulders seeks   To hang in careless wise,And full of blushes was her cheeks,   And of wishes were her eyes.Her blood still fresh into her face,   As on a message came,To say that in another place   It meant another game;Her cherry lip moist, plump, and fair,   Millions of kisses crown,Which ripe and uncropped dangle there,   And weigh the branches down.Her breasts, that welled so plump and high   Bred pleasant pain in me,For all the world I do defy   The like felicity;Her thighs and belly, soft and fair,   To me were only shown:To have seen such meat, and not to have eat,   Would have angered any stone.Her knees lay upward gently bent,   And all lay hollow under,As if on easy terms, they meant   To fall unforced asunder;Just so the Cyprian Queen did lie,   Expecting in her bower;When too long stay had kept the boy   Beyond his promised hour.‘Dull clown,’ quoth she, ‘why dost delay   such proffered bliss to take?Canst thou find out no other way   Similitudes to make?’Mad with delight I thundering   Throw my arms about her,But pox upon’t ’twas but a dream.   And so I lay without her.
***
Let’s call for Hymen if agreed thou art – Delays in love but crucify the heart.Love’s thorny tapers yet neglected lie;Speak thou the word, they’ll kindle by and by.The nimble hours woo us on to wed,And Genius waits to have us both to bed.Behold, for us the naked Graces stayWith maunds of roses for us to strew the way.Besides, the most religious prophet standsReady to join as well our hearts as hands.June yet smiles; but if she chance to chide,Ill luck ’twill bode to th’bridegroom and the bride.Tell me Anthea, dost thou fondly dreadThe loss of that we call a maidenhead?Come, I’ll instruct thee. Know, the vestal fireIs not by marriage quenched, but flames the higher.
***
Joy to the bridegroom and the brideThat lie by one another’s side!O fie upon the virgin beds,No loss is gain but maidenheads.Love quickly send the time may beWhen I shall deal my rosemary!I long to simper at a feast,To dance, and kiss, and do the rest.When I shall wed, and bedded beO then the qualm comes over me,And tells the sweetness of a themeThat I ne’er knew but in a dream.You ladies have the blessed nights,I pine in hope of such delights.And silly damsel only canMilk the cows’ teats and think on man:And sigh and wish to taste and proveThe wholesome sillabub of love.Make haste, at once twin-brothers bear;And leave new matter for a star.Women and ships are never shownSo fair as when their sails be blown.Then when the midwife hears your moan,I’ll sigh for grief that I have none.And you, dear knight, whose every kissReaps the full crop of Cupid’s bliss,Now you have found, confess and tellThat single sheets do make up hell.And then so charitable beTo get a man to pity me.
***
Of like importance is the posture too, In which the genial feat of Love we do: For as the females of the four foot kind, Receive the leapings of their Males behind; So the good Wives, with loins uplifted high, And leaning on their hands the fruitful stroke may try: For in that posture will they best conceive: Not when supinely laid they frisk and heave; For active motions only break the blow, And more of Strumpets than of Wives they show; When answering stroke with stroke, the mingled liquors flow. Endearments eager, and too brisk a bound, Throws off the Plow-share from the furrow’d ground. But common Harlots in conjunction heave, Because ’tis less their business to conceive Than to delight, and to provoke the deed; A trick which honest Wives but little need. 
***
Down, wanton, down! Have you no shame That at the whisper of Love’s name, Or Beauty’s, presto! up you raise Your angry head and stand at gaze? Poor Bombard-captain, sworn to reach The ravelin and effect a breach –   Indifferent what you storm or why, So be that in the breach you die! Love may be blind, but Love at least Knows what is man and what mere beast; Or Beauty wayward, but requires More delicacy from her squires. Tell me, my witless, whose one boast Could be your staunchness at the post, When were you made a man of parts To think fine and profess the arts? Will many-gifted Beauty come Bowing to your bald rule of thumb, Or Love swear loyalty to your crown? Be gone, have done! Down, wanton, down! 
***
Like the Idalian queen,Her hair about her eyne,With neck and breast’s ripe apples to be seen,At first glance of the mornIn Cyprus’ gardens gathering those fair flowersWhich of her blood were born,I saw, but fainting saw, my paramours.The Graces naked danced about the place,The winds and trees amazedWith silence on her gazed,The flowers did smile, like those upon her face;And as their aspen stalks those fingers band,That she might read my case,A hyacinth I wished me in her hand.
***
Thus every Creature, and of every Kind,The secret Joys of sweet Coition find:Not only Man’s Imperial Race; but theyThat wing the liquid Air, or swim the Sea,Or haunt the Desert, rush into the flame:For Love is Lord of all; and is in all the same.   ’Tis with this rage, the Mother Lion stung,Scours o’re the Plain; regardless of her young:Demanding Rites of Love, she sternly stalks;And hunts her Lover in his lonely Walks.   ’Tis then the shapeless Bear his Den forsakes;In Woods and Fields a wild destruction makes.Boars whet their Tusks; to battle Tygers move;Enrag’d with hunger, more enrag’d with love.Then wo to him, that in the desert LandOf Lybia travels, o’re the burning Sand.The Stallion snuffs the well-known Scent afar;And snorts and trembles for the distant Mare:Nor bitts nor Bridles, can his rage restrain;And rugged Rocks are interpos’d in vain.He makes his way o’re Mountains, and contemnsUnruly Torrents, and unfoorded Streams.The bristled Boar, who feels the pleasing wound,New grinds his arming Tusks, and digs the ground.The sleepy Leacher shuts his little Eyes;About his churning Chaps the frothy bubbles rise:He rubs his sides against a Tree; preparesAnd hardens both his Shoulders for the Wars.
***
Last night, as half asleep I dreaming lay,     Half naked came she in her little shift,          With tilted glass, and verses on her lips; Narcissus-eyes all shining for the fray,          Filled full of frolic to her wine-red lips,          Warm as a dewy rose, sudden she slips     Into my bed – just in her little shift. Said she, half naked, half asleep, half heard, With a soft sigh betwixt each lazy word, ‘Oh my old lover, do you sleep or wake!’ And instant I sat upright for her sake, And drank whatever wine she poured for me –  Wine of the tavern, or vintage it might be Of Heaven’s own vine: he surely were a churl Who refused wine poured out by such a girl, A double traitor he to wine and love. Go to, thou puritan! the gods above Ordained this wine for us, but not for thee; Drunkards we are by a divine decree, Yea, by the special privilege of heaven Foredoomed to drink and foreordained forgiven.  Ah! HAFIZ, you are not the only man     Who promised penitence and broke down after; For who can keep so hard a promise, man,      With wine and woman brimming o’er with laughter! O knotted locks, filled like a flower with scent, How have you ravished this poor penitent! 
***
With last night’s wine still singing in my head, I sought the tavern at the break of day, Though half the world was still asleep in bed; The harp and flute were up and in full swing, And a most pleasant morning sound made they; Already was the wine-cup on the wing. ‘Reason,’ said I, ‘’t is past the time to start, If you would reach your daily destination, The holy city of intoxication.’   So did I pack him off, and he depart With a stout flask for fellow-traveller. Left to myself, the tavern-wench I spied, And sought to win her love by speaking fair; Alas! she turned upon me, scornful-eyed, And mocked my foolish hopes of winning her. Said she, her arching eyebrows like a bow: ‘Thou mark for all the shafts of evil tongues! Thou shalt not round my middle clasp me so, Like my good girdle – not for all thy songs! – So long as thou in all created things Seest but thyself the centre and the end. Go spread thy dainty nets for other wings – Too high the Anca’s nest for thee, my friend.’ Then took I shelter from that stormy sea In the good ark of wine; yet, woe is me! Saki and comrade and minstrel all by turns, She is of maidens the compendium Who my poor heart in such a fashion spurns. Self, HAFIZ, self! That thou must overcome! Hearken the wisdom of the tavern-daughter! Vain little baggage – well, upon my word! Thou fairy figment made of clay and water, As busy with thy beauty as a bird. Well, HAFIZ, Life’s a riddle – give it up: There is no answer to it but this cup.   
***
With lovers, ’twas of old the fashionBy presents to convey their passion;No matter what the gift they sent,The Lady saw that love was meant.Fair Atalanta, as a favour,Took the boar’s head her Hero gave her;Nor could the bristly thing affront her,’Twas a fit present from a hunter.When Squires send woodcocks to the dame,It serves to show their absent flame:Some by a snip of woven hair,In posied lockets bribe the fair;How many mercenary matchesHave sprung from Di’mond-rings and watches!But hold – a ring, a watch, a locket,Would drain at once a Poet’s pocket;He should send songs that cost him nought,Nor ev’n he prodigal of thought.   Why then send Lampreys? fye, for shame!’Twill set a virgin’s blood on flame.This to fifteen a proper gift!It might lend sixty five a lift.    I know your maiden Aunt will scold,And think my present somewhat bold.I see her lift her hands and eyes.   ‘What eat it, Niece? eat Spanish flies!‘Lamprey’s a most immodest diet:‘You’ll neither wake nor sleep in quiet.‘Should I to night eat Sago cream,‘’Twould make me blush to tell my dream;‘If I eat Lobster, ’tis so warming,‘That ev’ry man I see looks charming;‘Wherefore had not the filthy fellow‘Laid Rochester upon your pillow?‘I vow and swear, I think the present‘Had been as modest and as decent.   ‘Who has her virtue in her power?‘Each day has its unguarded hour;‘Always in danger of undoing,‘A prawn, a shrimp may prove our ruin!   ‘The shepherdess, who lives on salad,‘To cool her youth, controuls her palate;‘Should Dian’s maids turn liqu’rish livers,‘And of huge lampreys rob the rivers,‘Then all beside each glade and Visto,‘You’d see Nymphs lying like Calisto.   ‘The man who meant to heat your blood,‘Needs not himself such vicious food –’   In this, I own, your Aunt is clear,I sent you what I well might spare:For when I see you, (without joking)Your eyes, lips, breasts, are so provoking,They set my heart more cock-a-hoop,Than could whole seas of craw-fish soupe.
***
The wrinkles on the brown face  of the carrying case conform to the buttocks, on which the streaks of water  from a five-gallon can dribble on the tailfront of the borrowed shirt he would wear if he could drain the pus from his swaddling  bandages, striations of skin tunneling into the photograph. This is no simple mug shot of a runaway boy in a training  film, Soweto's pummeled wire,  though the turrets of light  glisten in smoke, the soft  coal hooding his platform  entrance, dull and quiet. His father's miner's shoes  stand in puddles of polish,  the black soot baked into images of brittle torso,  an inferno of bullets laid  out in a letter bomb, the frontispiece of one sergeant- major blackening his mustache. On the drive to Evaton a blank pass away from Sharpeville  where the freehold morgans were bought by a black bishop from Ontario, Canada, on a trek northward from the Cape in 1908, I speak to myself as the woman riding in the backseat talks of this day, her husband's death, twenty-three years ago, run over by an Afrikaner in the wrong  passing lane; the passbook on the shoulder  of the road leading to Evaton is not the one I have in my hand, and the photograph is not of my great- grandfather, who set sail for Philadelphia  in the war year of 1916. He did not want a reception, his letters  embarking on a platform at Queenstown  where his eloquence struck two Zulu warriors  pledged to die in the homelands because they could not spin their own gold. These threaded heads weigh down the ears  in design of the warrior, Shaka, indifferent to the ruthless offerings over the dead bodies of his wives, childless in the campaigns with the British,  who sit on the ships of the Indian Ocean  each kraal shuddering near the borders; her lips turn in profile to the dust rising over a road  where his house once stood;  one could think of the women  carrying firewood as an etching  in remembrance to the silence,  commencing at Sharpeville, but this is Evaton, where he would come from across the galleyship of spears  turning in his robes to a bookmark; it is a good book, the picture of words  in the gloss of a photograph, the burned image of the man who wears  this image on the tongue of a child,  who might hold my hand as we walk in late afternoon into the predestined sun. The press of wrinkles on the blanketed  voice of the man who took the train  from Johannesburg is flattened in Cape Town,  and the history of this book  is on a trestle where Gandhi  worshipped in Natal, and the Zulu lullaby I cannot sing in Bantu is this song in the body  of a passbook and the book passes into a shirt and the back that wears it.
***
Those four black girls blown up  in that Alabama church remind me of five hundred  middle passage blacks, in a net, under water in Charleston harbor so redcoats wouldn't find them.  Can't find what you can't see  can you?
***
We reconstruct lives in the intensive  care unit, pieced together in a buffet  dinner: two widows with cancerous breasts  in their balled hands; a 30-year-old man  in a three-month coma from a Buick and a brick wall; a woman who bleeds off and on from her gullet; a prominent socialite, our own nurse,  shrieking for twins, “her bump gone”;  the gallery of veterans, succored, awake, without valves, some lungs gone. Splicing the meats with fluids seasoned on the dressing room table, she sings “the bump gone” refrain in this 69-degree oven, unstuffing her twin yolks carved from the breast, the dark meat  wrapped in tinfoil and clean newspaper; the half black registered nurse  hums her six years in an orphanage,  her adopted white family, breaded and primed in a posse, rising in clan for their dinner. We reload our brains as the cameras,  the film overexposed in the x-ray light, locked with our double door light meters: race and sex spooled and rungs in a hobby; we take our bundle and go home.
***
Above the freeway, over the music, we speak of the strategy of poems, bleeding wives who ulcerate our voices rhythming in the cut-heat Portland stink from the Willamette River; arteries of smog fixate this place in each recording, music, music, on Impulse.  This little racist community has few friends;  thousands of deerslayers hum into Beaverton,  the one talk show driven out for their talk as the liberals dig in to KGO out of San Francisco;  we troop toward the Lloyd Center for the ice-skating, the colorette bloomered dream merchants on rented skates,  and the Sunday Chronicle near the big hotel. The poets, man and wife, write in the dimming air, their daughter in the toy rooms connecting them, the typewriter tacking the nails and snaps of her gown.  This image of separation begins in adoption: her mother adopted out in San Jose; her father disowned, abandoned, torn out of the will; her name: Phoebe. And the sun does shine on them for this visit  in squat pigeontoes, and this beach ball sings.
***
Corktown Groceries ring in my intestines: grits aint groceries  eggs aint poultry Mona Lisa was a man:  ***
Whatever city or country road   you two are on there are nettles, and the dark invisible elements cling to your skin though you do not cry and you do not scratch your arms at forty-five degree angles   as the landing point of a swan in the Ohio, the Detroit River; at the Paradise Theatre you named the cellist with the fanatical fingers of the plumber, the exorcist, and though the gimmicky at wrist   and kneecaps could lift the seance   table, your voice was real in the gait and laughter of Uncle   Henry, who could dance on either   leg, wooden or real, to the sound   of the troop train, megaphone,   catching the fine pitch of a singer   on the athletic fields of Virginia. At the Radisson Hotel, we once took a fine angel of the law to the convention center,   and put her down as an egret in the subzero platform of a friend— this is Minneapolis, the movies are all of strangers, holding themselves   in the delicacy of treading water,   while they wait for the trumpet   of the 20th Century Limited over the bluff or cranny. You two men like to confront. the craters of history and spillage,   our natural infections of you   innoculating blankets and fur,   ethos of cadaver and sunflower. I hold the dogwood blossom, eat the pear, and watch the nettle   swim up in the pools of the completed song of Leadbelly and Little Crow   crooning the buffalo and horse   to the changes and the bridge   of a twelve-string guitar, the melody of “Irene”; this is really goodbye— I can see the precious stones of embolism and consumption on the platinum wires of the mouth: in the flowing rivers, in the public baths   of Ohio and Michigan.
***
1 Nose only above water;  an hour in the ice melt; paw in a beaver trap, northern leaping through— the outlet sieving, setter- retriever staked to her trip,  The stake of her young  life run to nose level. Farmers adjacent to the lake  call ’round for the owner;  at least they call around,  and a man in a pickup pulls her out, her crushed  paw limp in the blazing sun. Shivering on our pantry floor, wrapped in a snowsuit, I see her dam the clamped paw staked to the sleeve,  licking for breaks, a light trickle of blood  spilling from a torn nail. 2 Next spring she will tramp  down our wire, stamp on six goslings,  swim for teal, run down blackbirds, drag deer bones in our garden. She limps on the compost pile, shakes at the vet, fishes under makeshift docks, ferrets out mink, frog, green snake, any animal scrimmage without stakes:  listen to her spayed name— warned, thwarted, disregarded, beautiful— ***
All night the sound had   come back again, and again falls this quiet, persistent rain. What am I to myself that must be remembered,   insisted upon so often? Is it that never the ease,   even the hardness,   of rain falling will have for me something other than this,   something not so insistent— am I to be locked in this final uneasiness. Love, if you love me,   lie next to me. Be for me, like rain,   the getting out of the tiredness, the fatuousness, the semi- lust of intentional indifference. Be wet with a decent happiness.
***
My embarrassment at his nakedness,   at the pool’s edge, and my wife, with his, standing, watching— this was a freedom   not given me who am   more naked, less contained by my own white flesh and the ability   to take quietly   what comes to me. The sense of myself   separate, grew a white mirror in the quiet water he breaks with his hands   and feet, kicking, pulls up to land on the edge by the feet of these women   who must know   that for each man is a speech describes him, makes the day grow white and sure, a quietness of water   in the mind, lets hang, descriptive   as a risk, something for which he cannot find   a means or time.
***
As I sd to my   friend, because I am   always talking,—John, I sd, which was not his   name, the darkness sur- rounds us, what can we do against it, or else, shall we & why not, buy a goddamn big car, drive, he sd, for   christ’s sake, look   out where yr going.
***
The man sits in a timelessness   with the horse under him in time   to a movement of legs and hooves   upon a timeless sand. Distance comes in from the foreground   present in the picture as time he reads outward from and comes from that beginning. A wind blows in and out and all about the man   as the horse ran and runs to come in time. A house is burning in the sand.   A man and horse are burning.   The wind is burning. They are running to arrive.
***
The first retainer   he gave to her   was a golden wedding ring. The second—late at night   he woke up, leaned over on an elbow,   and kissed her. The third and the last— he died with and gave up loving and lived with her.
***
Comes the time when it’s later and onto your table the headwaiter   puts the bill, and very soon after rings out the sound of lively laughter— Picking up change, hands like a walrus,   and a face like a barndoor’s, and a head without any apparent size,   nothing but two eyes— So that’s you, man, or me. I make it as I can,   I pick up, I go faster than they know— Out the door, the street like a night,   any night, and no one in sight,   but then, well, there she is, old friend Liz— And she opens the door of her cadillac,   I step in back, and we’re gone. She turns me on— There are very huge stars, man, in the sky, and from somewhere very far off someone hands me a slice of apple pie, with a gob of white, white ice cream on top of it,   and I eat it— Slowly. And while certainly they are laughing at me, and all around me is racket   of these cats not making it, I make it in my wicker basket.
***
The galloping collection of boards   are the house which I afforded   one evening to walk into just as the night came down. Dark inside, the candle lit of its own free will, the attic   groaned then, the stairs led me up into the air. From outside, it must have seemed   a wonder that it was the inside he as me saw in the dark there.
***
He wants to be a brutal old man, an aggressive old man, as dull, as brutal as the emptiness around him, He doesn’t want compromise,   nor to be ever nice to anyone. Just mean, and final in his brutal, his total, rejection of it all. He tried the sweet,   the gentle, the “oh, let’s hold hands together” and it was awful, dull, brutally inconsequential. Now he’ll stand on his own dwindling legs.   His arms, his skin,   shrink daily. And he loves, but hates equally.
***
I dreamt last night the fright was over, that the dust came, and then water,   and women and men, together   again, and all was quiet in the dim moon’s light. A paean of such patience— laughing, laughing at me,   and the days extend over the earth’s great cover, grass, trees, and flower- ing season, for no clear reason.
***
Go out into brightened   space out there the fainter   yellowish place it makes for eye to enter out   to greyed penumbra all the   way to thoughtful searching   sight of all beyond that solid red both brick and seeming   metal roof or higher black   beyond the genial slope I   look at daily house top on   my own way up to heaven.          * Same roof, light’s gone   down back of it, behind   the crying end of day, “I   need something to do,” it’s   been again those other   things, what’s out there,   sodden edge of sea’s   bay, city’s graveyard, park   deserted, flattened aspect,   leaves gone colored fall   to sidewalk, street, the end   of all these days but   still this regal light.          * Trees stripped, rather shed of leaves, the black solid trunks up to fibrous mesh of smaller   branches, it is weather’s window,   weather’s particular echo, here   as if this place had been once,   now vacant, a door that had had   hinges swung in air’s peculiar   emptiness, greyed, slumped elsewhere,   asphalt blank of sidewalks, line of   linearly absolute black metal fence.          * Old sky freshened with cloud bulk   slides over frame of window the   shadings of softened greys a light   of air up out of this dense high   structured enclosure of buildings   top or pushed up flat of bricked roof   frame I love I love the safety of   small world this door frame back   of me the panes of simple glass yet   airy up sweep of birch trees sit in   flat below all designation declaration   here as clouds move so simply away.          * Windows now lit close out the   upper dark the night’s a face   three eyes far fainter than   the day all faced with light   inside the room makes eye re- flective see the common world   as one again no outside coming   in no more than walls and post- card pictures place faces across   that cautious dark the tree no   longer seen more than black edge   close branches somehow still between.          * He was at the edge of this reflective echo the words blown   back in air a bubble of suddenly   apparent person who walked to sit down by the familiar brook and   thought about his fading life all “fading life” in tremulous airy   perspect saw it hover in the surface   of that moving darkness at the edge   of sun’s passing water’s sudden depth   his own hands’ knotted surface the   sounding in himself of some other.          * One forty five afternoon red   car parked left hand side   of street no distinguishing   feature still wet day a bicycle   across the way a green door- way with arched upper window   a backyard edge of back wall to enclosed alley low down small   windows and two other cars green   and blue parked too and miles   and more miles still to go.          * This early still sunless morning when a chair’s   creak translates to cat’s cry a blackness still out the window might be apparent night when the house still sleeping behind me seems a bag of   immense empty silence and I feel the children   still breathing still shifting their dreams an   enigma will soon arrive here and the loved one   centers all in her heavy sleeping arm out the   leg pushed down bedclothes this body unseen un- known placed out there in night I can feel all   about me still sitting in this small spare pool of   light watching the letters the words try to speak.          * Classic emptiness it sits out there edge of   hierarchic roof top it marks with acid fine edge   of apparent difference it   is there here here that sky so up and out and where   it wants to be no birds no   other thing can for a   moment distract it be   beyond its simple space.
***
He comes here by whatever way he can,   not too late, not too soon. He sits, waiting. He doesn’t know   why he should have such a patience. He sits at a table   on a chair. He is comfortable   sitting there. No one else in this room, no others, no expectations,   no sounds. Had he walked   another way, would he be here,   like they say.
***
loop Down the road Up the hill Into the house Over the wall Under the bed After the fact By the way Out of the woods Behind the times In front of the door Between the lines Along the path echo In the way it was in the street   it was in the back it was in the house it was in the room it was in the dark it was fat fate Be at That this Come as If when   Stay or Soon then   Ever happen It will look Particular pleasures weather measures or   Dimestore delights faced with such sights. here Outstretched innocence   Implacable distance Lend me a hand See if it reaches time Of right Of wrong Of up Of down   Of who Of how Of when Of one   Of then Of if Of in Of out Of feel Of friend Of it Of now moral Now the inevitable   As in tales of woe   The inexorable toll   It takes, it takes. eat Head on backwards   Face front neck’s Pivot bunched flesh   Drops jowled brunch. toffee Little bit patted pulled   Stretched set let cool. case Whenas To for If where From in Past place Stated want   Gain granted Planned or have a heart Have heart Find head   Feel pattern Be wed   Smell water See sand   Oh boy Ain’t life grand oh oh Now and then   Here and there   Everywhere On and on winter Season’s upon us   Weather alarms us   Snow riot peace   Leaves struck fist. duty Let little Linda allow litigation Foster faith’s fantasy famously And answer all apt allegations Handmake Harold’s homework handsomely gotcha Passion’s particulars   Steamy hands Unwashed warmth   One night stands west acton summer Cat’s rats, Mother’s brother   Vacation’s patience, loud clouds   Fields far, seize trees School’s rules, friends tend   Lawn’s form, barn’s beams   Hay’s daze, swallows follow   Sun’s sunk, moon mends   Echo’s ending, begin again far “Far be it from Harry to alter the sense of drama inherent in the almighty tuxedo ...” “Far be it from Harry”   Sit next to Mary, See how the Other   Follows your Mother pat’s Pat’s place Pattern’s face   Aberrant fact   Changes that four’s Four’s forms Back and forth Feel way Hindside Paper route Final chute sentences Indefatigably alert when hit still hurt.   Whenever he significantly alters he falters.   Wondrous weather murmured mother.   Unforgettable twist in all such synthesis.   Impeccably particular you always were.   Laboriously enfeebled he still loved people. words Driving to the expected   Place in mind in Place of mind in Driving to the expected here You have to reach   Out more it’s Farther away from   You it’s here data Exoneration’s face Echoed distaste Privileged repetition   Makeshift’s decision—      •Now and then Behind time’s Emptied scene and   Memory’s mistakes—      •You are here   And there too   Being but one   Of you— scatter All that’s left of coherence. echo again Statement keep talking Train round bend over river into distance door Everything’s before you   were here. summer ’38 Nubble’s Light a sort   of bump I thought— a round insistent small place not like this— it was a bluff,   tip on the edge   of the sea. air Lift up so you’re   Floating out Of your skin at The edge but Mostly up seeming   Free of the ground. echoes Think of the Dance you could do   One legged man Two legged woman. there Hard to be unaddressed— Empty to reflection— Take the road east— Be where it is. echoes Sunrise always first— That light—is it Round the earth—what   Simple mindedness. star Where   It is There You are      •Out there   In here   Now it is   Was also      •Up where   It will be   And down   Again      •No one   Point   To it   Ever
***
Creo que si ... I believe   it will rain tomorrow ...***
inside my head Inside my head a common room,   a common place, a common tune, a common wealth, a common doom inside my head. I close my eyes.   The horses run. Vast are the skies, and blue my passing thoughts’ surprise inside my head. What is this space   here found to be, what is this place if only me? Inside my head, whose face? the tools First there, it proves to be still here.   Distant as seen, it comes then to be near.   I found it here and there unclear. What if my hand had only been   extension of an outside reaching in to work with common means to change me then? All things are matter, yet these seem   caught in the impatience of a dream,   locked in the awkwardness they mean. the swan Peculiar that swan should mean a sound? I’d thought of gods and power, and wounds. But here in the curious quiet this one has settled down. All day the barking dogs were kept at bay.   Better than dogs, a single swan, they say,   will keep all such malignant force away and so preserve a calm, make pond a swelling lake— sound through the silent grove a shattering spate   of resonances, jarring the mind awake. the rose Into one’s self come in again, here as if ever now to once again begin with beauty’s old, old problem never-ending— Go, lovely rose ... So was that story told in some extraordinary place then, once upon a time so old   it seems an echo now as it again unfolds. I point to me to look out at the world. I see the white, white petals of this rose unfold.   I know such beauty in the world grows cold. the skull “Come closer. Now there is nothing left   either inside or out to gainsay death,”   the skull that keeps its secrets saith. The ways one went, the forms that were   empty as wind and yet they stirred the heart to its passion, all is passed over. Lighten the load. Close the eyes.   Let the mind loosen, the body die,   the bird fly off to the opening sky. the star Such space it comes again to be,   a room of such vast possibility,   a depth so great, a way so free. Life and its person, thinking to find a company wherewith to keep the time   a peaceful passage, a constant rhyme, stumble perforce, must lose their way,   know that they go too far to stay   stars in the sky, children at play.
***
Sixty-two, sixty-three, I most remember   As time W. C. Williams dies and we are   Back from a hard two years in Guatemala   Where the meager provision of being   Schoolmaster for the kids of the patrones Of two coffee plantations has managed   Neither a life nor money. Leslie dies in   Horror of bank giving way as she and her   Sister and their friends tunnel in to make   A cubby. We live in an old cement brick   Farmhouse already inside the city limits   Of Albuquerque. Or that has all really   Happened and we go to Vancouver where,   Thanks to friends Warren and Ellen Tallman,   I get a job teaching at the University of British   Columbia. It’s all a curious dream, a rush   To get out of the country before the sad   Invasion of the Bay of Pigs, that bleak use   Of power. One of my British colleagues   Has converted the assets of himself and   His wife to gold bullion and keeps the   Ingots in a sturdy suitcase pushed under   Their bed. I love the young, at least I   Think I do, in their freshness, their attempt   To find ways into Canada from the western   Reaches. Otherwise the local country seems   Like a faded Edwardian sitcom. A stunned   Stoned woman runs one Saturday night up   And down the floors of the Hydro Electric   Building on Pender with the RCMP in hot Pursuit where otherwise we stood in long   Patient lines, extending often several blocks   Up the street. We were waiting to get our   Hands stamped and to be given a 12 pack   Of Molson’s. I think, I dream, I write the   Final few chapters of The Island, the despairs   Gathering at the end. I read Richard Brautigan’s   Trout Fishing In America but am too uptight   To enjoy his quiet, bright wit. Then that   Summer there is the great Vancouver Poetry   Festival, Allen comes back from India, Olson   From Gloucester, beloved Robert Duncan   From Stinson Beach. Denise reads “Hypocrite   Women” to the Burnaby ladies and Gary Snyder,   Philip Whalen, and Margaret Avison are there   Too along with a veritable host of the young.   Then it’s autumn again. I’ve quit my job   And we head back to Albuquerque   And I teach again at the university, and   Sometime just about then I must have   Seen myself as others see or saw me,   Even like in a mirror, but could not quite   Accept either their reassuring friendship   Or their equally locating anger. Selfish,   Empty, I kept at it. Thirty-eight years later   I seem to myself still much the same,   Even if I am happier, I think, and older.
***
Friend, remember how you showed us beasts love beauty?  We were wading in your lake with bluegills and you said,  Be careful, you will lose your beauty marks To their little jaws. We were a delicacy. From us they purchased The darkest part of the skin, only what contrasts on us.  And it was more than a pinch or sting, It’s a sensation of hunger That makes us spring off the bottom and swim out deep  And safe. “No blue stripes on cheeks; no red on fins; Old individual’s belly coppery red or brassy.”  As others see you, I think these indicate, Who would have you all one shade then wouldn’t have you. At your full table later, over muskellunge and lemon,  We read in the book the fish that liked us Has certain maxillaries “wholly wanting.” Your gourmet bluegill: It lives in the eye of the beholder, it swims the vitreous  Humor, would eat even your blind spot!  But we think we can paddle out there until all Goes dark, and we are wholly desirable, and too much.
***
The child I left your class to have   Later had a habit of sleeping   With her arms around a globe She’d unscrewed, dropped, and dented. I always felt she could possess it,   The pink countries and the mauve And the ocean which got to keep its blue. Coming from the Southern Hemisphere to teach,   Which you had never had to do, you took A bare-walled room, alone, its northern   Windowscapes as gray as walls. To decorate, you’d only brought a black madonna. I thought you must have skipped summer that year,   Southern winter, southern spring, then north For winter over again. Still, it pleased you To take credit for introducing us, And later to bring our daughter a small flipbook Of partners dancing, and a ring   With a secret whistle. —All are Broken now like her globe, but she remembers   Them as I recall the black madonna   Facing you across the room so that   In a way you had the dark fertile life   You were always giving gifts to.   Your smaller admirer off to school,   I take the globe and roll it away: where   On it now is someone like you?
***
Heads were rolling down the highway in high slat trucks.   I knew it was time to buy you and found you, The last sphere unscarred and undistorted in the store,   Big as my own head. It was time too to leave you uncut and full-featured,   Like the grandpa of twenty-five pumpkins in my past,   Khrushchev-cheeked and dwelling on yourself,   Great knee of my childhood. I plainly thought you would rot. I remembered the fetor of other pumpkins, Their blue populations coming out of hiding as if at the end   Of some apocalypse. I devoted a day to reading up on minor cucurbits:   I learned your dozen names in African And came home ready to raise or raze you,   Positive of change. But so far—eternity. I think I would not like   Eternity, after I had used my senses up, As I’ve tried with you—fingertips dragging over your world   Pole to pole Till they go dead like explorers, nostril cilia Detecting your fragrance more delicate than they— And my patience. It’s Christmas, it’s a new year   And I hear Of a family who’s kept you for four ... You endure like matter manufactured And indeed your stem seems punched into your orange gathers Like a button in a mattress. Shall I give you a room or a shrine? And shall I   Purchase you a mate and family, When ours is so inadequate, fixed upon your window   Deathbed as we are, Centered upon a time and birth, new holiday, new friends,   New pumpkins, celebrating when all That has failed us has passed away. You have not failed.
***
The man vending needles at our door  Was lucky to greet you. He looked poor but you acted needle-poor  Where I’d have said, I don’t need ... He sells needles to prick your heart  And they’ll take small bites Out of my finger in a layer of skin  Where my feelings are thin. The old thread knitting together his many wools  Might last another trudge To our porch: he came last year but I Refused and barely looked him in the eye. I’ve lost how many needles since then?  Besides he is mute And would see how dumb we are to buy  Three hundred needles for relief. But he supplied us to the end of life. I’ll give away some. And you might never use these points That push through cloth, cut to be made one.
***
The names of things—sparks! I ran on them like a component:   Henries, microhenries, Blue   Beavers, wee wee ductors:   Biographer of small lives, Of a plug and his girl named Jack,   Of Utopian colonies which worked— Steel, germanium, brass, aluminum, Replaceables.                    Outside, afloat, my words Swung an arm charting the woman Who was the river bottom. We tried, beyond work, at work,   To keep what we loved. Near Christmas I remember the office Women trimming their desperately   Glittering holy day trees. And, Just as I left, the company Talent show, the oils and sentiment   Thick on still lifes and seacoasts, The brush strokes tortured as a child’s   First script. Someone Had studied driftwood; another man,   The spray of a wave, the mania Of waters above torpedoes.
***
Lions don’t need your help. In the Serengeti,  For instance, one thousand like the very rich Hold sway over more than Connecticut. The mane  Of the lion, like the hooked jaw of the male salmon, Acts as a shield for defense and is the gift Of sexual selection. His eyes are fathomless amber. The lion is the most social of the big cats. Pride members are affectionate among themselves. They rub cheeks when they meet. They rest And hunt together. And cubs suckle indiscriminately. But strangers or members of a neighboring pride are not  Usually accepted. If a pride male meets a strange female He may greet her in a friendly fashion  And even mate with her But the pride females will drive her off. Male lions, usually depicted as indolent freeloaders Who let the lionesses do all the hunting, are not mere  Parasites. They maintain the integrity of the territory. Lions eat communally but completely lack table manners.  Indeed, lions give the impression that their evolution Toward a social existence is incomplete—that cooperation  In achieving a task does not yet include The equal division of the spoils. More bad news: lions are not good parents. But prowess, that they have. Their courage comes  From being built, like an automobile, For power. A visible lion is usually a safe lion,  But one should never feel safe Because almost always there is something one can’t see.  Given protection and power A lion does not need to be clever. Now, lions are not the most likable kind of animal Unless you are a certain type of person, That is, not necessarily leonine in the sense of manly Or ferocious, but one who wouldn’t mind resting twenty  Of twenty-four hours a day and who is not beyond Stealing someone else’s kill  About half the time. Lions are not my favorite kind of animal,  Gazelles seem nicer, A zebra has his own sort of appealing pathos,  Especially when he is sure prey for the lion. Lions have little to offer the spirit. If we made of ourselves parks and placed the lion In the constituent he most resembled  He would be in our blood.
***
The dove-white gulls on the wet lawn in Washington Square   in the early morning fog each a little ghost in the gloaming Souls transmigrated maybe from Hudson’s shrouded shores across all the silent years— Which one’s my maybe mafioso father   in his so white suit and black shoes in his real estate office Forty-second Street   or at the front table wherever he went— Which my dear lost mother with faded smile   locked away from me in time— Which my big brother Charley selling switching-signals all his life on the New York Central— And which good guy brother Clem sweating in Sing Sing’s darkest offices   deputy-warden thirty years watching executions in the wooden armchair   (with leather straps and black hood) He too gone mad with it in the end— And which my nearest brother Harry still kindest and dearest in a far suburb— I see them now all turn to me at last   gull-eyed in the white dawn about to call to me across the silent grass
***
Retired ballerinas on winter afternoons             walking their dogs                       in Central Park West     (or their cats on leashes—        the cats themselves old highwire artists)   The ballerinas                 leap and pirouette                            through Columbus Circle            while winos on park benches                (laid back like drunken Goudonovs)               hear the taxis trumpet together                like horsemen of the apocalypse                                  in the dusk of the gods   It is the final witching hour                 when swains are full of swan songs       And all return through the dark dusk                   to their bright cells                                   in glass highrises       or sit down to oval cigarettes and cakes                                 in the Russian Tea Room       or climb four flights to back rooms                                  in Westside brownstones                  where faded playbill photos                         fall peeling from their frames                               like last year’s autumn leaves
***
People getting divorced           riding around with their clothes in the car      and wondering what happened                       to everyone and everything                            including their other                                                 pair of shoes          And if you spy one              then who knows what happened                                              to the other                                            with tongue alack      and years later not even knowing                                if the other ever                                         found a mate                                   without splitting the seams                                        or remained intact                                                           unlaced       and the sole                      ah the soul                                      a curious conception            hanging on somehow                                      to walk again                                                    in the free air                               once the heel                                                  has been replaced
***
Sometime during eternity                                                        some guys show up   and one of them                       who shows up real late                                                        is a kind of carpenter         from some square-type place                                               like Galilee           and he starts wailing                                           and claiming he is hip             to who made heaven                                        and earth                                                       and that the cat                    who really laid it on us                                                  is his Dad           And moreover              he adds                          It’s all writ down                                               on some scroll-type parchments             which some henchmen                   leave lying around the Dead Sea somewheres                   a long time ago                                        and which you won’t even find            for a coupla thousand years or so                                                  or at least for       nineteen hundred and fortyseven                                                       of them                             to be exact                                              and even then          nobody really believes them                                                    or me                                                             for that matter           You’re hot                          they tell him           And they cool him           They stretch him on the Tree to cool                          And everybody after that                                                                is always making models                                             of this Tree                                                           with Him hung up             and always crooning His name                                      and calling Him to come down                                    and sit in                                                  on their combo                            as if he is the king cat                                                             who’s got to blow                         or they can’t quite make it                       Only he don’t come down                                                          from His Tree           Him just hang there                                        on His Tree           looking real Petered out                                           and real cool                                                              and also                    according to a roundup                                                     of late world news                from the usual unreliable sources                                                                real dead
***
In Goya’s greatest scenes we seem to see                                            the people of the world          exactly at the moment when              they first attained the title of                                                              ‘suffering humanity’             They writhe upon the page                                         in a veritable rage                                                                 of adversity             Heaped up                      groaning with babies and bayonets                                                        under cement skies               in an abstract landscape of blasted trees                   bent statues bats wings and beaks                                slippery gibbets                   cadavers and carnivorous cocks             and all the final hollering monsters                   of the                            ‘imagination of disaster’             they are so bloody real                                         it is as if they really still existed     And they do                   Only the landscape is changed  They still are ranged along the roads             plagued by legionnaires                      false windmills and demented roosters  They are the same people                                      only further from home       on freeways fifty lanes wide                               on a concrete continent                                         spaced with bland billboards                           illustrating imbecile illusions of happiness                                                 The scene shows fewer tumbrils                                                 but more strung-out citizens                                                                      in painted cars                                and they have strange license plates                              and engines                                            that devour America
***
Don’t let that horse                               eat that violin     cried Chagall’s mother                                      But he                         kept right on                                      painting And became famous And kept on painting                               The Horse With Violin In Mouth And when he finally finished it he jumped up upon the horse                                         and rode away             waving the violin And then with a low bow gave it to the first naked nude he ran across And there were no strings                                        attached
***
In Golden Gate Park that day                            a man and his wife were coming along            thru the enormous meadow                            which was the meadow of the world   He was wearing green suspenders                               and carrying an old beat-up flute                                                                         in one hand         while his wife had a bunch of grapes                                   which she kept handing out                                                                          individually                                                         to various squirrels                                                                            as if each                                                                were a little joke       And then the two of them came on                                                 thru the enormous meadow   which was the meadow of the world                                                  and then             at a very still spot where the trees dreamed          and seemed to have been waiting thru all time                                                                             for them                they sat down together on the grass                                               without looking at each other                   and ate oranges                                     without looking at each other                                                             and put the peels                in a basket which they seemed                                        to have brought for that purpose                     without looking at each other       And then                   he took his shirt and undershirt off          but kept his hat on                                     sideways                                                 and without saying anything                fell asleep under it                                            And his wife just sat there looking   at the birds which flew about    calling to each other                            in the stilly air       as if they were questioning existence                    or trying to recall something forgotten But then finally                    she too lay down flat                                                 and just lay there looking up                                                                                  at nothing                           yet fingering the old flute                                                                 which nobody played                             and finally looking over                                                                 at him                   without any particular expression                                                                except a certain awful look                           of terrible depression
***
Airport bus from JFK cruising through Queens passing huge endless cemetery   by Long Island’s old expressway (once a dirt path for wheelless Indians)   myriad small tombstones tilted up   gesturing statues on parapets   stone arms or wings upraised   lost among illegible inscriptions   And the setting yellow sun painting all of them on one side only with an ochre brush Rows and rows and rows and rows   of small stone slabs tilted toward the sun forever   While on the far horizon Mannahatta’s great stone slabs   skyscraper tombs and parapets   casting their own long black shadows   over all these long-haired graves   the final restless places of old-country potato farmers   dustbin pawnbrokers dead dagos and Dublin bouncers   tinsmiths and blacksmiths and roofers   house painters and house carpenters   cabinet makers and cigar makers   garment workers and streetcar motormen   railroad switchmen and signal salesmen   swabbers and sweepers and swampers   steam-fitters and key-punch operators   ward heelers and labor organizers   railroad dicks and smalltime mafiosi   shopkeepers and saloon keepers and doormen icemen and middlemen and conmen   housekeepers and housewives and dowagers   French housemaids and Swedish cooks   Brooklyn barmaids and Bronxville butlers   opera singers and gandy dancers   pitchers and catchers in the days of ragtime baseball   poolroom hustlers and fight promoters   Catholic sisters of charity   parish priests and Irish cops   Viennese doctors of delirium   now all abandoned in eternity   parcels in a dead-letter office   inscrutable addresses on them   beyond further deliverance   in an America wheeling past them   and disappearing oblivious   into East River’s echoing tunnels   down the great American drain
***
1. Far from the sea far from the sea                                      of Breton fishermen        the white clouds scudding                                              over Lowell             and the white birches the                                            bare white birches                   along the blear night roads                                        flashing by in darkness               (where once he rode                                         in Pop’s old Plymouth)   And the birch-white face                                     of a Merrimac madonna               shadowed in streetlight                             by Merrimac’s shroudy waters                     —a leaf blown                                      upon sea wind                      out of Brittany                                            over endless oceans 2. There is a garden in the memory of America There is a nightbird in its memory There is an andante cantabile in a garden in the memory   of America In a secret garden in a private place a song a melody a nightsong echoing in the memory of America   In the sound of a nightbird   outside a Lowell window In the cry of kids in tenement yards at night In the deep sound of a woman murmuring a woman singing broken melody in a shuttered room in an old wood house in Lowell As the world cracks by                                  thundering like a lost lumber truck                                     on a steep grade                  in Kerouac America The woman sits silent now                                      rocking backward         to Whistler’s Mother in Lowell                          and all the tough old                                           Canuck mothers                                 and Jack’s Mémère And they continue rocking       And may still on stormy nights show through             as a phantom after-image                             on silent TV screens                a flickered after-image                               that will not go away                   in Moody Street                   in Beaulieu Street                    in ‘dirtstreet Sarah Avenue’       in Pawtucketville        And in the Church of St. Jean Baptiste 3. And the Old Worthen Bar                                   in Lowell Mass. at midnight            in the now of Nineteen Eighty-seven Kerouackian revellers                                crowd the wood booths          ancient with carved initials                   of a million drinking bouts                         the clouts of the                                        Shrouded Stranger                   upon each wood pew       where the likes of Kerouack lumberjack              feinted their defiance                                  of dung and death Ah the broken wood and the punka fans still turning             (pull-cord wavings                                      of the breath of the Buddha)          still lost in Lowell’s                                         ‘vast tragedies of darkness’                            with Jack 4. And the Four Sisters Diner            also known as ‘The Owl’   Sunday morning now                            March Eighty-seven or any year of Sunday specials   Scrambled eggs and chopped ham    the bright booths loaded with families       Lowell Greek and Gaspé French                Joual patois and Argos argot     Spartan slaves escaped                          into the New World          here incarnate                               in rush of blood of                             American Sunday morning And “Ti-Jean” Jack Kerouac         comes smiling in                            baseball cap cocked up                hungry for mass                               in this Church of All Hungry Saints            haunt of all-night Owls                                            blessing every booth ... 5. Ah he the Silent Smiler     the one                with the lumberjack shirt          and cap with flaps askew                      blowing his hands in winter              as if to light a flame     The Shrouded Stranger knew him          as Ti-Jean the Smiler             grooking past redbrick mill buildings             down by the riverrun                               (O mighty Merrimac                                            ‘thunderous husher’)                where once upon a midnight then             young Ti-Jean danced with Mémère                    in the moondrowned light And rolled upon the greensward       his mother and lover          all one with Buddha                            in his arms 6. And then Ti-Jean Jack with Joual tongue       disguised as an American fullback in plaid shirt             crossing and recrossing America                                              in speedy cars       a Dr. Sax’s shadow shadowing him       like a shroudy cloud over the landscape          Song of the Open Road sung drunken                with Whitman and Jack London and Thomas Wolfe             still echoing through                             a Nineteen Thirties America                               A Nineteen Forties America                               an America now long gone                except in broken down dusty old                                               Greyhound Bus stations                    in small lost towns        Ti-Jean’s vision of America                 seen from a moving car window                       the same as Wolfe’s lonely                                                 sweeping vision                   glimpsed from a coach-train long ago        (‘And thus did he see first the dark land’)   And so Jack                 in an angel midnight bar    somewhere West of Middle America           where one drunk madonna                         (shades of one on a Merrimac corner)         makes him a gesture with her eyes                                                        a blue gesture             and Ti-Jean answers                                        only with his eyes   And the night goes on with them        And the light comes up on them                       making love in a parking lot 7. In the dark of his fellaheen night     in the light of the illuminated                                  Stations of the Cross                and the illuminated Grotto                            down behind the Funeral Home                                              by roar of river          where now Ti-Jean alone                      (returned to Lowell                         in one more doomed                                     Wolfian attempt                                     to Go Home Again)       gropes past the Twelve Stations of the Cross                reciting aloud the French inscriptions                    in his Joual accent             which makes the plaster French Christ                                                        laugh and cry                   as He hefts His huge Cross                                         up the Eternal Hill       And a very real tear drops                                            in the Grotto                            from the face                                               of the stoned Virgin 8.          Light upon light   The Mountain                   keeps still 9.          Hands over ears   He steals away                with the Bell. . . . Writ in Lowell and Conway and Boston Mass. and San Francisco   March-April 1987***
Away above a harborful                                               of caulkless houses   among the charley noble chimneypots                   of a rooftop rigged with clotheslines                a woman pastes up sails                                           upon the wind hanging out her morning sheets                                              with wooden pins                                   O lovely mammal                                              her nearly naked breasts                           throw taut shadows                                              when she stretches up   to hang at last the last of her                                               so white washed sins                     but it is wetly amorous                                                    and winds itself about her                        clinging to her skin                                                    So caught with arms                                                                                  upraised               she tosses back her head                                               in voiceless laughter       and in choiceless gesture then                                                  shakes out gold hair while in the reachless seascape spaces                            between the blown white shrouds            stand out the bright steamers                                                 to kingdom come
***
London                   crossfigured                     creeping with trams          and the artists on sundays                                         in the summer      all ‘tracking Nature’                                in the suburbs              It                 could have been anyplace                            but it wasn’t                               It was                                        London                                                 and when someone shouted over that they had got a model                                   I ran out across the court                      but then                                  when the model started taking off                 her clothes                                  there was nothing underneath                                                                            I mean to say       she took off her shoes                                      and found no feet                     took off her top                                           and found no tit                                                 under it                   and I must say she did look                                                           a bit                                                                 ASTOUNDED                          just standing there                               looking down                         at where her legs were                                                          not          But so very carefully then                                                 she put her clothes back on   and as soon as she was dressed again                                                       completely                       she was completely                                                  all right                 Do it again! cried someone                                                        rushing for his easel                 But she was afraid to                                                                                   and gave up modelling               and forever after                                                                          slept in her clothes
***
I am waiting for my case to come up   and I am waiting for a rebirth of wonder and I am waiting for someone to really discover America and wail and I am waiting   for the discovery of a new symbolic western frontier    and I am waiting   for the American Eagle to really spread its wings and straighten up and fly right and I am waiting for the Age of Anxiety to drop dead and I am waiting for the war to be fought which will make the world safe for anarchy and I am waiting for the final withering away of all governments and I am perpetually awaiting a rebirth of wonder I am waiting for the Second Coming   and I am waiting for a religious revival to sweep thru the state of Arizona   and I am waiting for the Grapes of Wrath to be stored   and I am waiting for them to prove that God is really American and I am waiting to see God on television piped onto church altars if only they can find   the right channel   to tune in on and I am waiting for the Last Supper to be served again with a strange new appetizer and I am perpetually awaiting a rebirth of wonder I am waiting for my number to be called and I am waiting for the Salvation Army to take over and I am waiting for the meek to be blessed and inherit the earth   without taxes and I am waiting for forests and animals to reclaim the earth as theirs and I am waiting for a way to be devised to destroy all nationalisms without killing anybody and I am waiting for linnets and planets to fall like rain and I am waiting for lovers and weepers to lie down together again in a new rebirth of wonder I am waiting for the Great Divide to be crossed   and I am anxiously waiting for the secret of eternal life to be discovered   by an obscure general practitioner and I am waiting for the storms of life to be over and I am waiting to set sail for happiness and I am waiting for a reconstructed Mayflower to reach America with its picture story and tv rights sold in advance to the natives and I am waiting for the lost music to sound again in the Lost Continent in a new rebirth of wonder I am waiting for the day that maketh all things clear and I am awaiting retribution for what America did   to Tom Sawyer   and I am waiting for Alice in Wonderland to retransmit to me her total dream of innocence and I am waiting for Childe Roland to come to the final darkest tower and I am waiting   for Aphrodite to grow live arms at a final disarmament conference in a new rebirth of wonder I am waiting to get some intimations of immortality by recollecting my early childhood and I am waiting for the green mornings to come again   youth’s dumb green fields come back again and I am waiting for some strains of unpremeditated art to shake my typewriter and I am waiting to write the great indelible poem and I am waiting for the last long careless rapture and I am perpetually waiting for the fleeing lovers on the Grecian Urn   to catch each other up at last and embrace and I am awaiting   perpetually and forever a renaissance of wonder
***
I am leading a quiet life   in Mike’s Place every day   watching the champs of the Dante Billiard Parlor   and the French pinball addicts.   I am leading a quiet life   on lower East Broadway.   I am an American. I was an American boy. I read the American Boy Magazine   and became a boy scout   in the suburbs. I thought I was Tom Sawyer   catching crayfish in the Bronx River and imagining the Mississippi.   I had a baseball mit and an American Flyer bike. I delivered the Woman’s Home Companion   at five in the afternoon or the Herald Trib at five in the morning. I still can hear the paper thump   on lost porches. I had an unhappy childhood.   I saw Lindbergh land. I looked homeward and saw no angel. I got caught stealing pencils from the Five and Ten Cent Store   the same month I made Eagle Scout. I chopped trees for the CCC   and sat on them. I landed in Normandy in a rowboat that turned over. I have seen the educated armies on the beach at Dover. I have seen Egyptian pilots in purple clouds   shopkeepers rolling up their blinds   at midday potato salad and dandelions at anarchist picnics. I am reading ‘Lorna Doone’ and a life of John Most terror of the industrialist a bomb on his desk at all times. I have seen the garbagemen parade   in the Columbus Day Parade behind the glib farting trumpeters. I have not been out to the Cloisters   in a long time nor to the Tuileries but I still keep thinking of going. I have seen the garbagemen parade   when it was snowing. I have eaten hotdogs in ballparks. I have heard the Gettysburg Address   and the Ginsberg Address. I like it here and I won’t go back where I came from. I too have ridden boxcars boxcars boxcars.   I have travelled among unknown men.   I have been in Asia with Noah in the Ark. I was in India when Rome was built. I have been in the Manger with an Ass. I have seen the Eternal Distributor   from a White Hill in South San Francisco and the Laughing Woman at Loona Park   outside the Fun House in a great rainstorm still laughing. I have heard the sound of revelry   by night. I have wandered lonely as a crowd. I am leading a quiet life outside of Mike’s Place every day   watching the world walk by in its curious shoes. I once started out to walk around the world but ended up in Brooklyn. That Bridge was too much for me.   I have engaged in silence exile and cunning. I flew too near the sun and my wax wings fell off. I am looking for my Old Man   whom I never knew. I am looking for the Lost Leader   with whom I flew. Young men should be explorers.   Home is where one starts from.   But Mother never told me there’d be scenes like this. Womb-weary I rest I have travelled. I have seen goof city. I have seen the mass mess. I have heard Kid Ory cry. I have heard a trombone preach.   I have heard Debussy strained thru a sheet. I have slept in a hundred islands where books were trees.   I have heard the birds   that sound like bells. I have worn grey flannel trousers and walked upon the beach of hell. I have dwelt in a hundred cities where trees were books. What subways what taxis what cafes! What women with blind breasts limbs lost among skyscrapers! I have seen the statues of heroes at carrefours. Danton weeping at a metro entrance Columbus in Barcelona pointing Westward up the Ramblas toward the American Express   Lincoln in his stony chair   And a great Stone Face   in North Dakota. I know that Columbus   did not invent America. I have heard a hundred housebroken Ezra Pounds.   They should all be freed.   It is long since I was a herdsman. I am leading a quiet life   in Mike’s Place every day   reading the Classified columns. I have read the Reader’s Digest from cover to cover and noted the close identification of the United States and the Promised Land where every coin is marked   In God We Trust but the dollar bills do not have it being gods unto themselves.   I read the Want Ads daily   looking for a stone a leaf   an unfound door. I hear America singing in the Yellow Pages. One could never tell the soul has its rages. I read the papers every day   and hear humanity amiss in the sad plethora of print. I see where Walden Pond has been drained   to make an amusement park.   I see they’re making Melville   eat his whale. I see another war is coming   but I won’t be there to fight it.   I have read the writing on the outhouse wall. I helped Kilroy write it. I marched up Fifth Avenue blowing on a bugle in a tight platoon   but hurried back to the Casbah   looking for my dog. I see a similarity between dogs and me. Dogs are the true observers   walking up and down the world   thru the Molloy country. I have walked down alleys   too narrow for Chryslers. I have seen a hundred horseless milkwagons   in a vacant lot in Astoria. Ben Shahn never painted them   but they’re there askew in Astoria. I have heard the junkman’s obbligato.   I have ridden superhighways   and believed the billboard’s promises   Crossed the Jersey Flats and seen the Cities of the Plain And wallowed in the wilds of Westchester with its roving bands of natives in stationwagons. I have seen them. I am the man.   I was there.   I suffered somewhat. I am an American. I have a passport. I did not suffer in public. And I’m too young to die. I am a selfmade man. And I have plans for the future. I am in line   for a top job. I may be moving on to Detroit. I am only temporarily a tie salesman. I am a good Joe. I am an open book to my boss. I am a complete mystery to my closest friends. I am leading a quiet life in Mike’s Place every day   contemplating my navel. I am a part of the body’s long madness. I have wandered in various nightwoods.   I have leaned in drunken doorways. I have written wild stories without punctuation. I am the man. I was there.   I suffered   somewhat. I have sat in an uneasy chair. I am a tear of the sun.   I am a hill where poets run. I invented the alphabet after watching the flight of cranes   who made letters with their legs. I am a lake upon a plain.   I am a word in a tree. I am a hill of poetry.   I am a raid on the inarticulate. I have dreamt that all my teeth fell out   but my tongue lived   to tell the tale. For I am a still of poetry. I am a bank of song.   I am a playerpiano in an abandoned casino   on a seaside esplanade   in a dense fog still playing. I see a similarity between the Laughing Woman and myself. I have heard the sound of summer   in the rain. I have seen girls on boardwalks   have complicated sensations.   I understand their hesitations. I am a gatherer of fruit.   I have seen how kisses   cause euphoria. I have risked enchantment.   I have seen the Virgin   in an appletree at Chartres And Saint Joan burn at the Bella Union. I have seen giraffes in junglejims their necks like love wound around the iron circumstances   of the world. I have seen the Venus Aphrodite   armless in her drafty corridor.   I have heard a siren sing   at One Fifth Avenue. I have seen the White Goddess dancing   in the Rue des Beaux Arts   on the Fourteenth of July   and the Beautiful Dame Without Mercy   picking her nose in Chumley’s.   She did not speak English.   She had yellow hair and a hoarse voice I am leading a quiet life   in Mike’s Place every day   watching the pocket pool players   making the minestrone scene   wolfing the macaronis   and I have read somewhere   the Meaning of Existence   yet have forgotten just exactly where. But I am the man And I’ll be there. And I may cause the lips   of those who are asleep   to speak. And I may make my notebooks   into sheaves of grass.   And I may write my own   eponymous epitaph instructing the horsemen   to pass.
***
There was a young lady of Lynn, Who was so uncommonly thin     That when she essayed     To drink lemonade She slipped through the straw and fell in.
***
I didn’t get much sleep last night thinking about underwear Have you ever stopped to consider   underwear in the abstract   When you really dig into it some shocking problems are raised   Underwear is something   we all have to deal with   Everyone wears some kind of underwear The Pope wears underwear I hope The Governor of Louisiana   wears underwear I saw him on TV He must have had tight underwear He squirmed a lot Underwear can really get you in a bind You have seen the underwear ads for men and women so alike but so different Women’s underwear holds things up Men’s underwear holds things down   Underwear is one thing   men and women have in common   Underwear is all we have between us You have seen the three-color pictures with crotches encircled to show the areas of extra strength and three-way stretch promising full freedom of action Don’t be deceived It’s all based on the two-party system which doesn’t allow much freedom of choice   the way things are set up   America in its Underwear struggles thru the night Underwear controls everything in the end   Take foundation garments for instance   They are really fascist forms of underground government making people believe something but the truth telling you what you can or can’t do   Did you ever try to get around a girdle   Perhaps Non-Violent Action is the only answer Did Gandhi wear a girdle? Did Lady Macbeth wear a girdle? Was that why Macbeth murdered sleep?   And that spot she was always rubbing— Was it really in her underwear? Modern anglosaxon ladies must have huge guilt complexes always washing and washing and washing   Out damned spot Underwear with spots very suspicious   Underwear with bulges very shocking   Underwear on clothesline a great flag of freedom   Someone has escaped his Underwear   May be naked somewhere Help! But don’t worry Everybody’s still hung up in it There won’t be no real revolution And poetry still the underwear of the soul   And underwear still covering a multitude of faults in the geological sense— strange sedimentary stones, inscrutable cracks!   If I were you I’d keep aside an oversize pair of winter underwear   Do not go naked into that good night   And in the meantime keep calm and warm and dry No use stirring ourselves up prematurely   ‘over Nothing’ Move forward with dignity hand in vest Don’t get emotional And death shall have no dominion   There’s plenty of time my darling Are we not still young and easy Don’t shout
***
In the backyard of our house on Norwood,  there were five hundred steel cages lined up,  each with a wooden box roofed with tar paper; inside, two stories, with straw for a bed. Sometimes the minks would pace  back and forth wildly, looking for a way out; or else they’d hide in their wooden houses, even when  we’d put the offering of raw horse meat on their trays, as if  they knew they were beautiful and wanted to deprive us. In spring the placid kits drank with glazed eyes. Sometimes the mothers would go mad  and snap their necks. My uncle would lift the roof like a god  who might lift our roof, look down on us  and take us out to safety. Sometimes one would escape. He would go down on his hands and knees,  aiming a flashlight like a bullet of light, hoping to catch the orange gold of its eyes. He wore huge boots, gloves so thick their little teeth couldn’t bite through.  “They’re wild,” he’d say. “Never trust them.” Each afternoon when I put the scoop of raw meat rich  with eggs and vitamins on their trays,  I’d call to each a greeting. Their small thin faces would follow as if slightly curious.  In fall they went out in a van, returning sorted, matched, their skins hanging down on huge metal  hangers, pinned by their mouths. My uncle would take them out when company came and drape them over his arm—the sweetest cargo.  He’d blow down the pelts softly and the hairs would part for his breath and show the shining underlife which, like  the shining of the soul, gives us each character and beauty.
***
My mother was not impressed with her beauty; once a year she put it on like a costume, plaited her black hair, slick as cornsilk, down past her hips,  in one rope-thick braid, turned it, carefully, hand over hand,  and fixed it at the nape of her neck, stiff and elegant as a crown,  with tortoise pins, like huge insects, some belonging to her dead mother, some to my living grandmother. Sitting on the stool at the mirror, she applied a peachy foundation that seemed to hold her down, to trap her, as if we never would have noticed what flew among us unless it was weighted and bound in its mask. Vaseline shined her eyebrows, mascara blackened her lashes until they swept down like feathers;  her eyes deepened until they shone from far away. Now I remember her hands, her poor hands, which, even then were old from scrubbing, whiter on the inside than they should have been, and hard, the first joints of her fingers, little fattened pads,  the nails filed to sharp points like old-fashioned ink pens, painted a jolly color. Her hands stood next to her face and wanted to be put away, prayed for the scrub bucket and brush to make them useful.  And, as I write, I forget the years I watched her  pull hairs like a witch from her chin, magnify every blotch—as if acid were thrown from the inside. But once a year my mother  rose in her white silk slip, not the slave of the house, the woman, took the ironed dress from the hanger—  allowing me to stand on the bed, so that  my face looked directly into her face,  and hold the garment away from her  as she pulled it down.
***
Every town with black Catholics has a St. Peter Claver’s.  My first was nursery school. Miss Maturin made us fold our towels in a regulation square and nap on army cots. No mother questioned; no child sassed. In blue pleated skirts, pants, and white shirts, we stood in line to use the open toilets and conserved light by walking in darkness. Unsmiling, mostly light-skinned, we were the children of the middle class, preparing to take our parents’ places in a world that would demand we fold our hands and wait. They said it was good for us, the bowl of soup, its pasty whiteness; I learned to swallow and distrust my senses. On holy cards St. Peter’s face is olive-toned, his hair near kinky; I thought he was one of us who pass between the rich and poor, the light and dark. Now I read he was “a Spanish Jesuit priest who labored for the salvation of the African Negroes and the abolition of the slave trade.” I was tricked again, robbed of my patron, and left with a debt to another white man.
***
That time my grandmother dragged me through the perfume aisles at Saks, she held me up  by my arm, hissing, “Stand up,” through clenched teeth, her eyes bright as a dog’s cornered in the light. She said it over and over, as if she were Jesus, and I were dead. She had been solid as a tree, a fur around her neck, a light-skinned matron whose car was parked, who walked on swirling marble and passed through brass openings—in 1945. There was not even a black elevator operator at Saks. The saleswoman had brought velvet  leggings to lace me in, and cooed, as if in the service of all grandmothers.  My grandmother had smiled, but not  hungrily, not like my mother who hated them, but wanted to please,  and they had smiled back, as if they were wearing wooden collars.  When my legs gave out, my grandmother  dragged me up and held me like God  holds saints by the roots of the hair. I begged her to believe I couldn’t help it. Stumbling,  her face white with sweat, she pushed me through the crowd, rushing away from those eyes  that saw through  her clothes, under her skin, all the way down  to the transparent  genes confessing.
***
I. Tonight, I look, thunderstruck at the gold head of my grandchild.  Almost asleep, he buries his feet  between my thighs; his little straw eyes close in the near dark. I smell the warmth of his raw  slightly foul breath, the new death  waiting to rot inside him. Our breaths equalize our heartbeats;  every muscle of the chest uncoils,  the arm bones loosen in the nest  of nerves. I think of the peace  of walking through the house, pointing to the name of this, the name of that, an educator of a new man. Mother. Grandmother. Wise Snake-woman who will show the way;  Spider-woman whose black tentacles hold him precious. Or will tear off his head,  her teeth over the little husband, the small fist clotted in trust at her breast. This morning, looking at the face of his father, I remembered how, an infant, his face was too dark,  nose too broad, mouth too wide. I did not look in that mirror and see the face that could save me from my own darkness. Did he, looking in my eye, see what I turned from: my own dark grandmother bending over gladioli in the field, her shaking black hand defenseless  at the shining cock of flower? I wanted that face to die, to be reborn in the face of a white child. I wanted the soul to stay the same,  for I loved to death, to damnation and God-death,  the soul that broke out of me. I crowed: My Son! My Beautiful!  But when I peeked in the basket,  I saw the face of a black man. Did I bend over his nose and straighten it with my fingers  like a vine growing the wrong way?  Did he feel my hand in malice? Generations we prayed and fucked  for this light child, the shining god of the second coming;  we bow down in shame and carry the children of the past  in our wallets, begging forgiveness. II. A picture in a book, a lynching. The bland faces of men who watch  a Christ go up in flames, smiling,  as if he were a hooked fish, a felled antelope, some wild thing tied to boards and burned.  His charring body gives off light—a halo burns out of him. His face scorched featureless; the hair matted to the scalp like feathers. One man stands with his hand on his hip,  another with his arm slung over the shoulder of a friend,  as if this moment were large enough  to hold affection. III. How can we wake from a dream we are born into, that shines around us,  the terrible bright air? Having awakened, having seen our own bloody hands,  how can we ask forgiveness, bring before our children the real  monster of their nightmares? The worst is true. Everything you did not want to know. 
***
The most popular “act” in Penn Station is the three black kids in ratty  sneakers & T-shirts playing two violins and a cello—Brahms.  White men in business suits have already dug into their pockets  as they pass and they toss in  a dollar or two without stopping.  Brown men in work-soiled khakis  stand with their mouths open,  arms crossed on their bellies  as if they themselves have always  wanted to attempt those bars.  One white boy, three, sits cross-legged in front of his idols—in ecstasy— their slick, dark faces, their thin, wiry arms, who must begin to look like angels! Why does this trembling pull us? A: Beneath the surface we are one. B: Amazing! I did not think that they could speak this tongue.
***
A professor invites me to his “Black Lit” class; they’re reading Larson’s Passing. One of the black students says, “Sometimes light-skinned blacks think they can fool other blacks, but I can always tell,” looking right through me. After I tell them I am black, I ask the class, “Was I passing when I was just sitting here, before I told you?” A white woman shakes her head desperately, as if I had deliberately deceived her. She keeps examining my face, then turning away as if she hopes I’ll disappear. Why presume “passing” is based on what I leave out and not what she fills in? In one scene in the book, in a restaurant, she’s “passing,” though no one checked her at the door— “Hey, you black?” My father, who looked white, told me this story: every year when he’d go to get his driver’s license, the man at the window filling out the form would ask, “White or black?” pencil poised, without looking up. My father wouldn’t pass, but he might use silence to trap a devil. When he didn’t speak, the man would look up at my father’s face. “What did he write?” my father quizzed me.
***
I love the way the black ants use their dead. They carry them off like warriors on their steel backs. They spend hours struggling, lifting, dragging (it is not grisly as it would be for us, to carry them back to be eaten), so that every part will be of service. I think of my husband at his father’s grave— the grass had closed over the headstone, and the name had disappeared. He took out  his pocket knife and cut the grass away, he swept it with his handkerchief to make it clear. “Is this the way we’ll be forgotten?” And he bent down over the grave and wept. 
***
I had a little brother And I brought him to my mother And I said I want another Little brother for a change. But she said don’t be a bother So I took him to my father And I said this little bother Of a brother’s very strange. But he said one little brother Is exactly like another And every little brother Misbehaves a bit he said. So I took the little bother From my mother and my father And I put the little bother Of a brother back to bed.
***
Poor old lady, she swallowed a fly. I don't know why she swallowed a fly. Poor old lady, I think she'll die. Poor old lady, she swallowed a spider. It squirmed and wriggled and turned inside her. She swallowed the spider to catch the fly. I don't know why she swallowed a fly. Poor old lady, I think she'll die. Poor old lady, she swallowed a bird. How absurd!   She swallowed a bird. She swallowed the bird to catch the spider, She swallowed the spider to catch the fly, I don't know why she swallowed a fly. Poor old lady, I think she'll die. Poor old lady, she swallowed a cat. Thank of that!   She swallowed a cat. She swallowed the cat to catch the bird. She swallowed the bird to catch the spider. She swallowed the spider to catch the fly, I don't know why she swallowed a fly. Poor old lady, I think she'll die. Poor old lady, she swallowed a dog. She went the whole hog when she swallowed the dog. She swallowed the dog to catch the cat, She swallowed the cat to catch the bird, She swallowed the bird to catch the spider. She swallowed the spider to catch the fly, I don't know why she swallowed a fly. Poor old lady, I think she'll die. Poor old lady, she swallowed a cow. I don't know how she swallowed a cow. She swallowed the cow to catch the dog, She swallowed the dog to catch the cat, She swallowed the cat to catch the bird, She swallowed the bird to catch the spider, She swallowed the spider to catch the fly, I don't know why she swallowed a fly. Poor old lady, I think she'll die. Poor old lady, she swallowed a horse. She died, of course.
***
I wondered if the others felt as heroic and as safe: my unmangled family   slept while I slid uncertain feet ahead   behind my flashlight’s beam. Stones, thick roots as twisted as   a ruined body, what did I fear? I hoped my batteries had eight more lives than the lost child. I feared I’d find something. Reader, by now you must be sure   you know just where we are,   deep in symbolic woods.   Irony, self-accusation,   someone else’s suffering.   The search is that of art. You’re wrong, though it’s   an intelligent mistake.   There was a real lost child.   I don’t want to swaddle it   in metaphor. I’m just a journalist who can’t believe in objectivity.   I’m in these poems because I’m in my life.   But I digress. A man four volunteers   to the left of me   made the discovery. We circled in like waves returning to the parent shock. You’ve read this far, you might as well   have been there too. Your eyes accuse   me of false chase. Come off it, you’re the one who thought it wouldn’t   matter what we found. Though we came with lights and tongues thick in our heads, the issue was a human life. The child was still alive. Admit you’re glad.
***
Did I ever tell you that Mrs. McCave Had twenty-three sons and she named them all Dave? Well, she did.   And that wasn't a smart thing to do. You see, when she wants one and calls out, "Yoo-Hoo! Come into the house, Dave!" she doesn't get one. All twenty-three Daves of hers come on the run! This makes things quite difficult at the McCaves' As you can imagine, with so many Daves. And often she wishes that, when they were born, She had named one of them Bodkin Van Horn And one of them Hoos-Foos.   And one of them Snimm. And one of them Hot-Shot.   And one Sunny Jim. And one of them Shadrack.   And one of them Blinkey. And one of them Stuffy.   And one of them Stinkey. Another one Putt-Putt.   Another one Moon Face. Another one Marvin O'Gravel Balloon Face. And one of them Ziggy.   And one Soggy Muff. One Buffalo Bill.   And one Biffalo Buff. And one of them Sneepy.   And one Weepy Weed. And one Paris Garters.   And one Harris Tweed. And one of them Sir Michael Carmichael Zutt And one of them Oliver Boliver Butt And one of them Zanzibar Buck-Buck McFate ... But she didn't do it.   And now it's too late.
***
Because we rage inside the old boundaries, like a young girl leaving the Church,  scared of her parents. Because we all dream of saving  the shaggy, dung-caked buffalo,  shielding the herd with our bodies. Because grief unites us, like the locked antlers of moose  who die on their knees in pairs. 
***
A snake is the love of a thumb  and forefinger. Other times, an arm that has swallowed a bicep. The air behind this one  is like a knot in a child’s shoelace come undone while you were blinking. It is bearing something away.  What? What time  does the next snake leave? This one’s tail is ravelling  into its burrow— a rosary returned to a purse. The snake is the last time your spine  could go anywhere alone. 
***
No day is right for the apocalypse, if you ask a housewife in Talking Rock, Georgia, or maybe Hop River, Connecticut. She is opening a plastic bag. A grotesque parody of the primeval muck starts oozing out. And behold, the plastic bag is magic; there is no closing it. Soap in unsoftened water, sewage, asbestos coiled like vermicelli, Masonite shavings, a liquefied lifetime subscription to The New York Times delivered all at once. Empty body stockings, limp, forlorn, like collapsed lungs. A blithering slur  of face creams, an army of photocopies  travelling on its stomach of acronyms,  tooth paste tubes wrung rigid and dry.  Also, two hundred and one tons of crumpled bumpers wrapped in insurance  claims, slag, coal dust, plastic trimmings,  industrial excrementa. Lake Erie is returning  our gifts.        At first she thought she had won  something. Now it slithers through the house,  out windows, down the street, spreading  everywhere but heading, mostly, west.  Maybe heading is the wrong word, implying shape and choice. It took the shape of the landscape it rippled across like the last blanket. And it went west because the way lay open  once again: not the same fecund rug the earth grew when white people scraped  their first paths to the Pacific across the waves of the inland grasses. Outside Ravenswood, West Virginia,  abandoned cars shine in the sun like beetlebacks. The ore it took to make the iron it took to make the steel  it took to make the cars, that ore would remember the glaciers if it could.  Now comes another grinding, but not— thanks to our new techniques—so slow.  The amiable cars wait stilly in their pasture.  Three Edsels forage in the southeast corner  like bishops of a ruined church. There are Fords and Dodges, a Mercury  on blocks, four Darts and a Pierce Arrow, a choir of silenced Chevrolets. And, showing their lapsed trademarks  and proud grilles to a new westward  expansion, two Hudsons, a LaSalle and a DeSoto.        I was hoping to describe the colors of this industrial autumn— rust, a faded purple like the dusty skin of a Concord grape, flaking moss- green paint with primer peeking  blandly through, the garish macho reds  insurance companies punish, the greys  (opaque) and silvers (bright), the snob colors  (e.g. British Racing Green), the two-tone  combinations time will spurn like roadkill (1957: pink and grey), cornflower blue, naval blue, royal blue, stark blue, true blue, the blacker blue the diver sees beneath him when he plumbs thirty feet— but now they are all covered, rolling and churning in the last accident, like bubbles in lava. And now my Cincinnati—the hills  above the river, the lawn that drained toward Ricwood Ave. like a small valley of uncles, the sultry river musk that slid like a compromising note through my bedroom window— and indeed all Cincinnati seethes. The vats at Proctor & Gamble cease their slick congealing, and my beloved birthplace is but another whorl of dirt. Up north near Lebanon and Troy and Rosewood, the corn I skulked in as a boy lays back its ears like a shamed dog.  Hair along the sow’s spine rises. The Holstein pivots his massive head toward where the barn stood; the spreading stain he sees is his new owner. What we imagined was the fire-storm, or, failing that, the glacier. Or we hoped we’d get off easy, losing only California. With the seismologists and mystics we say the last California ridge crumble into the ocean. And we were read with elegies: O California, sportswear and defense contracts, gasses that induce deference, high school girls with their own cars, we wanted to love you without pain. O California, when you were moored to us like a vast splinter of melon, like a huge and garish gondola, then we were happier, although we showed it by easy contempt. But now you are lost at sea, your cargo of mudslides and Chardonnays lost, the prints of the old movies lost, the thick unlighted candles of the redwoods snuffed in advance. On the ocean floor they lie like hands of a broken clock. O California, here we come, quoting Ecclesiastes, ruinous with self-knowledge. Meanwhile, because the muck won’t stop for lamentation, Kansas succumbs. Drawn down by anklets of DDT, the jayhawk circles lower and lower  while the sludge moils and crests. Now we are about to lose our voices we remember that tomorrow is our echo.  O the old songs, the good days: bad faith and civil disobedience, sloppy scholarship and tooth decay.  Now the age of footnotes is ours. Ibid, ibid, ibid, ibid, ibid. While the rivers thickened and fish  rose like vomit, the students of water  stamped each fish with its death date.  Don’t let a chance like this go by,  they thought, though it went by  as everything went by—towers  of water flecked by a confetti  of topsoil, clucked tongues, smug  prayers. What we paid too much for  and too little attention to, our very lives, all jumbled now and far too big in aggregate  to understand or mourn, goes by, and all our eloquence places its weight on the spare word goodbye.
***
the only parts of the body the same   size at birth as they’ll always be.   “That’s why all babies are beautiful,”   Thurber used to say as he grew   blind—not dark, he’d go on   to explain, but floating in a pale   light always, a kind of candlelit   murk from a sourceless light.   He needed dark to see: for a while he drew on black   paper with white pastel chalk   but it grew worse. Light bored   into his eyes but where did it go?   Into a sea of phosphenes, along the wet fuse of some dead   nerve, it hid everywhere and couldn’t   be found. I’ve used up three guesses, all of them right. It’s like scuba diving, going down   into the black cone-tip that dives   farther than I can, though I dive   closer all the time.
***
The ruth of soups and balm of sauces I renounce equally. What Rorschach saw in ink I find in the buttery frizzle in the sauté pan, and I leave it behind,  and the sweet peat-smoke tang of bananas,  and cream in clots, and chocolate. I give away the satisfactions of food and take desire for food: I’ll be travelling light to the heaven of revisions. Why be  adipose: an expense, etc., in a waste, etc.? Something like the body of the poet’s work, with its pale shadows, begins to pare and replace the poet’s body, and isn’t it time?  
***
“Hope” is the thing with feathers - That perches in the soul - And sings the tune without the words - And never stops - at all - And sweetest - in the Gale - is heard - And sore must be the storm - That could abash the little Bird That kept so many warm - I’ve heard it in the chillest land - And on the strangest Sea - Yet - never - in Extremity, It asked a crumb - of me.
***
My mother stands at the screen door, laughing.   “Out out damn Spot,” she commands our silly dog.   I wonder what this means. I rise into adult air like a hollyhock, I’m so proud to be loved   like this. The air is tight to my nervous body. I use new clothes and shoes the way the corn-studded   soil around here uses nitrogen, giddily. Ohio, Ohio, Ohio. Often I sing to myself all day like a fieldful of August   insects, just things I whisper, really, a trance in sneakers. I’m learning to read from my mother and soon I’ll go to school, I hate it when anyone dies or leaves and the air                   goes slack around my body and I have to hug myself, a cloud, an imaginary friend, the stream in the road- side park. I love to be called for dinner.   Spot goes out and I go in and the lights in the kitchen go on and the dark, which also has a body like a cloud’s, leans lightly against the house. Tomorrow I’ll find the sweatstains it left, little grey smudges. .       .       .        Here’s a sky no higher than a streetlamp, and a stack of morning papers cinched by wire.   It’s 4:00 A.M. A stout dog, vaguely beagle,   minces over the dry, fresh-fallen snow; and here’s our sleep-sodden paperboy   with his pliers, his bike, his matronly dog,   his unclouding face set for paper route like an alarm clock. Here’s a memory in the making, for this could be the morning   he doesn’t come home and his parents   two hours later drive his route until they find him asleep, propped against a streetlamp, his papers all delivered and his dirty paper- satchel slack, like an emptied lung, and he blur-faced and iconic in the morning air rinsing itself a paler and paler blue through which a last few dandruff-flecks   of snow meander casually down.   The dog squeaks in out of the dark, snuffling me too me too. And here he goes   home to memory, and to hot chocolate on which no crinkled skin forms like infant ice, and to the long and ordinary day, school, two triumphs and one severe humiliation on the playground, the past already growing its scabs, the busride home, dinner, and evening leading to sleep like the slide that will spill him out, come June,   into the eye-reddening chlorine waters   of the municipal pool. Here he goes to bed. Kiss. Kiss. Teeth. Prayers. Dark. Dark.   Here the dog lies down by his bed,   and sighs and farts. Will he always be this skinny, chicken-bones?   He’ll remember like a prayer how his mother made breakfast for him every morning before he trudged out   to snip the papers free. Just as   his mother will remember she felt guilty never to wake up with him   to give him breakfast. It was Cream of Wheat they always or never had together. It turns out you are the story of your childhood   and you’re under constant revision,   like a lonely folktale whose invisible folks are all the selves you’ve been, lifelong,   shadows in fog, grey glimmers at dusk.   And each of these selves had a childhood it traded for love and grudged to give away,   now lost irretrievably, in storage   like a set of dishes from which no food, no Cream of Wheat, no rabbit in mustard   sauce, nor even a single raspberry,   can be eaten until the afterlife, which is only childhood in its last   disguise, all radiance or all humiliation,   and so it is forfeit a final time. In fact it was awful, you think, or why   should the piecework of grief be endless?   Only because death is, and likewise loss, which is not awful, but only breathtaking.   There’s no truth about your childhood,   though there’s a story, yours to tend, like a fire or garden. Make it a good one,   since you’ll have to live it out, and all its revisions, so long as you all shall live, for they shall be gathered to your deathbed,   and they’ll have known to what you and they would come, and this one time they’ll weep for you. The map in the shopping center has an X signed “you are here.” A dream is like that.   In a dream you are never eighty, though   you may risk death by other means: you’re on a ledge and memory calls you   to jump, but a deft cop talks you in to a small, bright room, and snickers. And in a dream, you’re everyone somewhat,   but not wholly. I think I know how that works: for twenty-one years I had a father   and then I became a father, replacing him   but not really. Soon my sons will be fathers. Surely, that’s what middle-aged means,   being father and son to sons and father.   That a male has only one mother is another story, told wherever men weep wholly.   Though nobody’s replaced. In one dream   I’m leading a rope of children to safety, through a snowy farm. The farmer comes out   and I have to throw snowballs well to him   so we may pass. Even dreaming, I know he’s my father, at ease in his catcher’s   squat, and that the dream has revived   to us both an old unspoken fantasy: we’re a battery. I’m young, I’m brash,   I don’t know how to pitch but I can   throw a lamb chop past a wolf. And he can handle pitchers and control a game.   I look to him for a sign. I’d nod for anything. The damn thing is hard to grip without seams, and I don’t rely only on my live, young arm, but throw by all   the body I can get behind it, and it fluffs toward him no faster than the snow   in the dream drifts down. Nothing takes forever, but I know what the phrase means. The children grow more cold   and hungry and cruel to each other the longer the ball’s in the air, and it begins to melt. By the time it gets to him we’ll be   our waking ages, and each of us is himself   alone, and we all join hands and go. .       .       .        Toward dawn, rain explodes on the tin roof   like popcorn. The pale light is streaked by grey and that green you see just under the surface of water, a shimmer more than a color.   Time to dive back into sleep, as if into   happiness, that neglected discipline .... In those sixth-grade book reports you had to say if the book was optimistic   or not, and everyone looked at you the same way: how would he turn out?   He rolls in his sleep like an otter.   Uncle Ed has a neck so fat it’s funny, and on the way to work he pries the cap off a Pepsi. Damn rain didn’t cool one weary   thing for long; it’s gonna be a cooker. The boy sleeps with a thin chain of sweat   on his upper lip, as if waking itself,   becoming explicit, were hard work. Who knows if he’s happy or not?   A child is all the tools a child has,   growing up, who makes what he can.
***
Whose woods these are I think I know.   His house is in the village though;   He will not see me stopping here   To watch his woods fill up with snow.   My little horse must think it queer   To stop without a farmhouse near   Between the woods and frozen lake   The darkest evening of the year.   He gives his harness bells a shake   To ask if there is some mistake.   The only other sound’s the sweep   Of easy wind and downy flake.   The woods are lovely, dark and deep,   But I have promises to keep,   And miles to go before I sleep,   And miles to go before I sleep.
***
Here come real stars to fill the upper skies, And here on earth come emulating flies, That though they never equal stars in size, (And they were never really stars at heart) Achieve at times a very star-like start. Only, of course, they can't sustain the part.
***
There’s a crack in this glass so fine we can’t see it,  and in the blue eye of the candleflame’s needle  there’s a dark fleck, a speck of imperfection that could contain, like a microchip, an epic treatise on beauty, except it’s in the eye of the beheld.  And at the base of our glass there’s nothing so big as a tiny puddle, but an ooze, a viscous  patina like liquefied tarnish. It’s like a text so short it consists only of the author’s signature, which has to stand, like the future, for what might  have been: a novel, let’s say, thick with ambiguous life.  Its hero forgets his goal as he nears it, so that it’s like rain evaporating in the very sight of parched  Saharans on the desert floor. There, by chance, he meets  a thirsty and beautiful woman. What a small world! 
***
The ones his age who shook my hand  on their way out sent fear along  my arm like heroin. These weren’t  men mute about their feelings, or what’s a body language for? And I, the glib one, who’d stood with my back to my father’s body and praised the heart that attacked him?  I’d made my stab at elegy, the flesh made word: the very spit in my mouth was sour with ruth and eloquence. What could be worse?  Silence, the anthem of my father’s  new country. And thus this babble,  like a dial tone, from our bodies. 
***
Amidst the too much that we buy and throw   away and the far too much we wrap it in,   the bear found a few items of special interest—a honeydew rind, a used tampon,   the bone from a leg of lamb. He’d rock back   lightly onto his rear paws and slash open a plastic bag, and then his nose— jammed almost with a surfeit of rank and likely information, for he would pause— and then his whole dowsing snout would   insinuate itself a little way inside. By now he’d have hunched his weight   forward slightly, and then he’d snatch it back,   trailed by some tidbit in his teeth. He’d look   around. What a good boy am he. The guardian of the dump was used to this and not amused. “He’ll drag that shit   every which damn way,” he grumbled who’d dozed and scraped a pit to keep that shit   where the town paid to contain it. The others of us looked and looked. “City   folks like you don’t get to see this often,”   one year-round resident accused me. Some winter I’ll bring him down to learn   to love a rat working a length of subway   track. “Nope,” I replied. Just then the bear   decamped for the woods with a marl of grease   and slather in his mouth and on his snout,   picking up speed, not cute (nor had he been   cute before, slavering with greed, his weight   all sunk to his seated rump and his nose stuck   up to sift the rich and fetid air, shaped   like a huge, furry pear), but richly fed on the slow-simmering dump, and gone   into the bug-thick woods and anecdote. 
***
We have a secret, just we three, The robin, and I, and the sweet cherry-tree; The bird told the tree, and the tree told me, And nobody knows it but just us three. But of course the robin knows it best, Because she built the—I shan't tell the rest; And laid the four little—something in it—I'm afraid I shall tell it every minute. But if the tree and the robin don't peep, I'll try my best the secret to keep; Though I know when the little birds fly about Then the whole secret will be out.
***
Rather than hold his hands properly  arched off the keys, like cats with their backs up, Monk, playing block chords, hit the keys with his fingertips well  above his wrists, shoulders up, wrists down, scarce  room for the pencil, ground  freshly to a point, piano teachers love to poke into the palms of junior pianists with lazy hands. What easy villains these robotic  dullards are in their floral- print teaching dresses (can those mauve blurs be peonies?). The teachers’ plucky,  make-do wardrobes suggest, like the wan bloom of dust the couch exhaled  when I scrunched down to wait  for Mrs. Oxley, just how we value  them. She’d launch my predecessor  home and drink some lemonade,  then free me from the couch. The wisdom in Rocky Mount, North Carolina, where Monk grew up,  is that those names, Thelonious  Sphere, came later, but nobody’s  sure: he made his escape by turning himself into a genius in broad daylight while nobody  watched. Just a weird little black  kid one day and next thing anybody  knew he was inexplicable and gone. We don’t give lessons  in that. In fact it’s to stave off such desertions that we pay for lessons. It works for a while.  Think of all the time we spend  thinking about our kids. It’s Mrs. Oxley, the frump with a metronome, and Mr. Mote, the bad teacher and secret weeper,  we might think on, and everyone  we pay to tend our young, opaque  and truculent and terrified,  not yet ready to replace us,  or escape us, if that be the work. 
***
When John Henry was a little tiny baby Sitting on his mama's knee, He picked up a hammer and a little piece of steel Saying, "Hammer's going to be the death of me, Lord, Lord,     Hammer's going to be the death of me." John Henry was a man just six feet high, Nearly two feet and a half across his breast. He'd hammer with a nine-pound hammer all day And never get tired and want to rest, Lord, Lord,     And never get tired and want to rest. John Henry went up on the mountain And he looked one eye straight up its side. The mountain was so tall and John Henry was so small, He laid down his hammer and he cried, "Lord, Lord,"     He laid down his hammer and he cried. John Henry said to his captain, "Captain, you go to town, Bring me back a TWELVE-pound hammer, please, And I'll beat that steam drill down, Lord, Lord,     I'll beat that steam drill down." The captain said to John Henry, "I believe this mountain's sinking in." But John Henry said, "Captain, just you stand aside-- It's nothing but my hammer catching wind, Lord, Lord,     It's nothing but my hammer catching wind." John Henry said to his shaker, "Shaker, boy, you better start to pray, 'Cause if my TWELVE-pound hammer miss that little piece of steel, Tomorrow'll be your burying day, Lord, Lord,     Tomorrow'll be your burying day." John Henry said to his captain, "A man is nothing but a man, But before I let your steam drill beat me down, I'd die with a hammer in my hand, Lord, Lord,     I'd die with a hammer in my hand." The man that invented the steam drill, He figured he was mighty high and fine, But John Henry sunk the steel down fourteen feet While the steam drill only made nine, Lord, Lord,     The steam drill only made nine. John Henry hammered on the right-hand side. Steam drill kept driving on the left. John Henry beat that steam drill down. But he hammered his poor heart to death, Lord, Lord,     He hammered his poor heart to death. Well, they carried John Henry down the tunnel And they laid his body in the sand. Now every woman riding on a C and O train Says, "There lies my steel-driving man, Lord, Lord,     There lies my steel-driving man."
***
A peanut sat on a railroad track, His heart was all a-flutter. The five-fifteen came rushing by-- Toot toot!   Peanut butter!
***
A bridge engineer, Mr. Crumpett, Built a bridge for the good River Bumpett.     A mistake in the plan     Left a gap in the span, But he said, “Well, they'll just have to jump it.”
***
Sing a song of sixpence, A pocket full of rye, Four and twenty blackbirds Baked in a pie. When the pie was opened The birds began to sing— Wasn't that a dainty dish To set before the king? The king was in the counting-house Counting out his money, The queen was in the parlor Eating bread and honey, The maid was in the garden Hanging out the clothes. Along came a blackbird And snipped off her nose.
***
Now I lay me down to rest, I pray I pass tomorrow’s test. If I should die before I wake, That’s one less test I’ll have to take.
***
I love to do my homework, It makes me feel so good. I love to do exactly As my teacher says I should. I love to do my homework, I never miss a day. I even love the men in white Who are taking me away.
***
How much wood could a woodchuck chuck If a woodchuck could chuck wood? As much wood as a woodchuck could chuck, If a woodchuck could chuck wood.
***
It’s raining, it’s pouring,     The old man’s snoring. He got into bed     And bumped his head And couldn’t get up in the morning.
***
Quick!   quick!     The cat's been sick. Where?   where?     Under the chair. Hasten!   hasten!     Fetch the basin. Alack!   alack!     It is too late, The carpet's in     An awful state. No!   no!     It's all in vain, For she has licked it     Up again.
***
I've got a rocket In my pocket; I cannot stop to play. Away it goes! I've burned my toes. It's Independence Day.
***
I eat my peas with honey; I've done it all my life. It makes the peas taste funny, But it keeps them on the knife.
***
Don't worry if your job is small, And your rewards are few. Remember that the mighty oak, Was once a nut like you.
***
The first day of Christmas, My true love sent to me A partridge in a pear tree. The second day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The third day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The fourth day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The fifth day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Five gold rings, Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The sixth day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Six geese a-laying, Five gold rings, Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The seventh day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Seven swans a-swimming, Six geese a-laying, Five gold rings, Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The eighth day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Eight maids a-milking, Seven swans a-swimming, Six geese a-laying, Five gold rings, Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The ninth day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Nine drummers drumming, Eight maids a-milking, Seven swans a-swimming, Six geese a-laying, Five gold rings, Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The tenth day of Christmas, My true love sent to me Ten pipers piping, Nine drummers drumming, Eight maids a-milking, Seven swans a-swimming, Six geese a-laying, Five gold rings, Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The eleventh day of Christmas My true love sent to me Eleven ladies dancing, Ten pipers piping, Nine drummers drumming, Eight maids a-milking, Seven swans a-swimming, Six geese a-laying, Five gold rings, Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree. The twelfth day of Christmas My true love sent to me Twelve fiddlers fiddling, Eleven ladies dancing, Ten pipers piping, Nine drummers drumming, Eight maids a-milking, Seven swans a-swimming, Six geese a-laying, Five gold rings, Four colly birds, Three French hens, Two turtle doves, and A partridge in a pear tree.
***
I know a funny little man,     As quiet as a mouse, Who does the mischief that is done     In everybody’s house! There’s no one ever sees his face,     And yet we all agree That every plate we break was cracked     By Mr. Nobody. ’Tis he who always tears out books,     Who leaves the door ajar, He pulls the buttons from our shirts,     And scatters pins afar; That squeaking door will always squeak,     For prithee, don’t you see, We leave the oiling to be done     By Mr. Nobody. He puts damp wood upon the fire   That kettles cannot boil;His are the feet that bring in mud,   And all the carpets soil.The papers always are mislaid;   Who had them last, but he?There’s no one tosses them about   But Mr. Nobody.***
Little Robin Redbreast     Sat upon a tree; Up went Pussy-cat,     Down went he. Down came Pussy-cat,     And away Robin ran; Says little Robin Redbreast     “Catch me if you can.” Little Robin Redbreast     Hopped upon a wall; Pussy-cat jumped after him,     And almost got a fall. Little Robin chirped and sang,     And what did Pussy say? Pussy-cat said “Mew,”     and Robin flew away.
***
’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves       Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: All mimsy were the borogoves,       And the mome raths outgrabe. “Beware the Jabberwock, my son!       The jaws that bite, the claws that catch! Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun       The frumious Bandersnatch!” He took his vorpal sword in hand;       Long time the manxome foe he sought— So rested he by the Tumtum tree       And stood awhile in thought. And, as in uffish thought he stood,       The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame, Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,       And burbled as it came! One, two! One, two! And through and through       The vorpal blade went snicker-snack! He left it dead, and with its head       He went galumphing back. “And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?       Come to my arms, my beamish boy! O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!”       He chortled in his joy. ’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves       Did gyre and gimble in the wabe: All mimsy were the borogoves,       And the mome raths outgrabe.
***
Wynken, Blynken, and Nod one night     Sailed off in a wooden shoe-- Sailed on a river of crystal light,     Into a sea of dew. "Where are you going, and what do you wish?"     The old moon asked of the three. "We have come to fish for the herring fish That live in this beautiful sea; Nets of silver and gold have we!"                   Said Wynken,                   Blynken,                   And Nod. The old moon laughed and sang a song,     As they rocked in the wooden shoe, And the wind that sped them all night long     Ruffled the waves of dew. The little stars were the herring fish     That lived in that beautiful sea-- "Now cast your nets wherever you wish--     Never afeard are we!"     So cried the stars to the fishermen three:                   Wynken,                   Blynken,                   And Nod.All night long their nets they threw   To the stars in the twinkling foam---Then down from the skies came the wooden shoe,   Bringing the fishermen home;'T was all so pretty a sail it seemed   As if it could not be,And some folks thought 't was a dream they 'd dreamed   Of sailing that beautiful sea---   But I shall name you the fishermen three:                     Wynken,                     Blynken,                     And Nod.Wynken and Blynken are two little eyes,   And Nod is a little head,And the wooden shoe that sailed the skies   Is a wee one's trundle-bed.So shut your eyes while mother sings   Of wonderful sights that be,And you shall see the beautiful things   As you rock in the misty sea,   Where the old shoe rocked the fishermen three:                     Wynken,                     Blynken,                     And Nod.
***
Haze. Three student violists boarding  a bus. A clatter of jackhammers. Granular light. A film of sweat for primer  and the heat for a coat of paint. A man and a woman on a bench:  she tells him he must be psychic, for how else could he sense, even before she knew,  that she’d need to call it off? A bicyclist  fumes by with a coach’s whistle clamped  hard between his teeth, shrilling like a teakettle  on the boil. I never meant, she says.  But I thought, he replies. Two cabs almost  collide; someone yells fuck in Farsi.  I’m sorry, she says. The comforts  of loneliness fall in like a bad platoon.  The sky blurs—there’s a storm coming  up or down. A lank cat slinks liquidly  around a corner. How familiar it feels to feel strange, hollower than a bassoon. A rill of chill air in the leaves. A car alarm. Hail. 
***
The best game the fairies play,     The best game of all, Is sliding down steeples—     (You know they’re very tall). You fly to the weathercock,     And when you hear it crow, You fold your wings and clutch your things     And then let go! They have a million other games—     Cloud-catching’s one, And mud-mixing after rain     Is heaps and heaps of fun; But when you go and stay with them     Never mind the rest, Take my advice—they’re very nice,     But steeple-sliding’s best!
***
Going to sleep, I cross my hands on my chest.   They will place my hands like this.   It will look as though I am flying into myself.
***
Those scars rooted me. Stigmata stalagmite I sat at a drive-in and watched the stars Through a straw while the Coke in my lap went Waterier and waterier. For days on end or Nights no end I crawled on all fours or in My case no fours to worship you: Amoeba Behemoth. —Then you explained your DNA calls for Meaner genes than mine and since you are merely So to speak its external expression etcet Ergo among your lovers I’ll never be ... Ah that movie was so faraway the stars melting Made my thighs icy. I see: it’s not you Who is not requiting me, it’s something in you Over which you have no say says no to me.
***
Here not long enough after the hospital happened   I find her closet lying empty and stop my play   And go in and crane up at three blackwire hangers   Which quiver, airy, released. They appear to enjoy Their new distance, cognizance born of the absence   Of anything else. The closet has been cleaned out   Full-flush as surgeries where the hangers could be   Amiable scalpels though they just as well would be Themselves, in basements, glovelessly scraping uteri   But, here, pure, transfigured heavenward, they’re Birds, whose wingspans expand by excluding me. Their   Range is enlarged by loss. They’d leave buzzards Measly as moths: and the hatshelf is even higher!— As the sky over a prairie, an undotted desert where   Nothing can swoop sudden, crumple in secret. I’ve fled   At ambush, tag, age: six, must I face this, can I have my hide-and-seek hole back now please, the   Clothes, the thicket of shoes, where is it? Only   The hangers are at home here. Come heir to this   Rare element, fluent, their skeletal grace sings Of the ease with which they let go the dress, slip,   Housecoat or blouse, so absolvingly. Free, they fly Trim, triangular, augurs leapt ahead from some geometric   God who soars stripped (of flesh, it is said): catnip To a brat placated by model airplane kits kids My size lack motorskills for, I wind up glue-scabbed,   Pawing goo-goo fingernails, glaze skins fun to peer in as Frost-i-glass doors ... But the closet has no windows, Opaque or sheer: I must shut my eyes, shrink within   To peep into this wall. Soliciting sleep I’ll dream   Mother spilled and cold, unpillowed, the operating- Table cracked to goad delivery: its stirrups slack, Its forceps closed: by it I’ll see mobs of obstetrical   Personnel kneel proud, congratulatory, cooing And oohing and hold the dead infant up to the dead   Woman’s face as if for approval, the prompted Beholding, tears, a zoomshot kiss. White-masked   Doctors and nurses patting each other on the back,   Which is how in the Old West a hangman, if He was good, could gauge the heft of his intended ... Awake, the hangers are sharper, knife-’n’-slice, I jump   Helplessly to catch them to twist them clear,   Mis-shape them whole, sail them across the small air   Space of the closet. I shall find room enough here By excluding myself; by excluding myself, I’ll grow.
***
is thought to be a confession, won by endless torture, but which our interrogators must hate to record—all those old code names, dates, the standard narrative of sandpaper throats, even its remorse, fall ignored. Far away, a late (not lost) messenger stares, struck by window bargains or is it the gift of a sudden solicitude: is she going to lift up her shadow’s weight, shift hers onto it? She knows who bears whom. In that momentary museum where memory occurs more accrue of those torturers’ pincers than lessened fingernails, eyes teased to a pulp, we beg for closeups. Ormolus, objets d’art!  A satyr drains an hourglass with one gulp.
***
The CIA and the KGB exchange Christmas cards A blade snaps in two during an autopsy The bouquet Bluebeard gave his first date reblooms Many protest the public stoning of a guitar pick Railroad trains drop off the bourgeois’ pointy head A martyr sticks a coffeecup out under a firehose Moviestars make hyenas lick their spaceship God’s hand descends into a glove held steady by the police At their reunion The New Faces recognize each other A spoiled child sleeps inside a thermometer A single misprint in a survival manual kills everyone The peace night makes according to the world comes
***
You could say, I suppose, that he ate his way out,  like the prisoner who starts a tunnel with a spoon, or you could say he was one in whom nothing was lost,  who took it all in, or that he was big as a bus. He would say, and he did, in one of those blurred  melismatic slaloms his sentences ran—for all the music was in his speech: swift switches of tempo,  stop-time, double time (he could talk in 6/8), “I just ruined my body.” And there, Exhibit A,  it stood, that Parthenon of fat, the tenant voice  lifted, as we say, since words are a weight, and music.  Silence is lighter than air, for the air we know rises but to the edge of the atmosphere. You have to pick up The Bass, as Mingus called his, with audible capitals, and think of the slow years  the wood spent as a tree, which might well have been enough for wood, and think of the skill the bassmaker  carried without great thought of it from home  to the shop and back for decades, and know what bassists before you have played, and know how much of this is stored in The Bass like energy  in a spring and know how much you must coax out.  How easy it would be, instead, to pull a sword  from a stone. But what’s inside the bass wants out, the way one day you will. Religious stories are rich  in symmetry. You must release as much of this hoard  as you can, little by little, in perfect time, as the work of the body becomes a body of work. 
***
The children are hiding among the raspberry canes.  They look big to one another, the garden small.  Already in their mouths this soft fruit  That lasts so briefly in the supermarket  Tastes like the past. The gritty wall,  Behind the veil of leaves, is hollow. There are yellow wasps inside it. The children know.  They know the wall is hard, although it hums. They know a lot and will not forget it soon. When did we forget? But we were never  Children, never found where they were hiding And hid with them, never followed  The wasp down into its nest With a fingertip that still tingles. We lie in bed at night, thinking about The future, always the future, always forgetting That it will be the past, hard and hollow,  Veiled and humming, soon enough. 
***
One girl a full head taller Than the other—into their Sunday dresses.  First, the slip, hardly a piece of fabric,  Softly stitched and printed with a bud. I’m not their mother, and tangle, then untangle  The whole cloth—on backwards, have to grab it  Round their necks. But they know how to pull  Arms in, a reflex of being dressed, And also, a child’s faith. The mass of stuff  That makes the Sunday frocks collapses In my hands and finds its shape, only because  They understand the drape of it— These skinny keys to intricate locks.  The buttons are a problem For a surgeon. How would she connect  These bony valves and stubborn eyelets? The filmy dress revolves in my blind fingers.  The slots work one by one. And when they’re put together, Not like puppets or those doll-saints  That bring tears to true believers, But living children, somebody’s real daughters,  They do become more real. They say, “Stop it!” and “Give it back!”  And “I don’t want to!” They’ll kiss A doll’s hard features, whispering, “I’m sorry.” I know just why my mother  Used to worry. Your clothes don’t keep  You close—it’s nakedness. Clad in my boots and holster, I would roam with my six-gun buddies. We dealt fake death to one another, Fell and rolled in filth and rose, Grimy with wounds, then headed home. But Sunday ... what was that tired explanation  Given for wearing clothes that Scratched and shone and weighed like a slow hour?  That we should shine—in gratitude. So, I give that explanation, undressing them,  And wait for the result. After a day like Sunday, such a long one, When they lie down, half-dead, To be undone, they won’t help me. They cry, “It’s not my fault.” 
***
Night’s afterbirth, last dream before waking,  Holding on with dissolving hands, Out of it came, not a line of old men, But pairs of headlights, delaying morning. It felt like tears, like wetted bedsheets,  And suspended in it like a medicine In vapor was the ocean’s presence, ghost  Of deep water and the bite of salt. Here you found your body again, The hand before your face and the face it touched,  Eyes floating, feet on invisible ground, Vagueness like another skin. Sent out into it anyway, because it was morning,  To taste it, touch blind hardness Like marble ruins, and skirt the edges, Razors in goosedown, hydrants’ fists. Abruptly out of it waves appeared,  Transmuted from hanging silver ore, crafted  Before the eyes into curving metals That broke into soup scum, Queen Anne’s lace. Out of a great nothing, a theology. Out of the amorphous, an edgeless body  Or one like a hunting mass of tendrils That hurried down the sand, moved by hunger. I remember a gang of friends Racing a fog bank’s onslaught along the beach.  Seal-slick, warm from the sun This thing would eat, they ran laughing. The fog came on. And they were beautiful, The three boys and one girl, still in her wetsuit,  And the dissolution overtaking them, Their stridency, full of faith, still audible. All morning bathed in a dovelike brooding.  The fog satisfied itself by overwhelming The meagre dew, watering the doors  0f snails, the leeward mold, and held still. And then near noon there was a concentration As if the sky tried to find a slippery word  Or remember—that’s right—remember Where it was in an unfamiliar bedroom. And knew. And switched the light on. Wide awake. 
***
Amazing to believe that nothingness   Surrounds us with delight and lets us be,   And that the meekness of nonentity,   Despite the friction of the world of sense,   Despite the leveling of violence, Is all that matters. All the energy We force into the matchhead and the city   Explodes inside a loving emptiness. Not Dante’s rings, not the Zen zero’s mouth,   Out of which comes and into which light goes,   This God recedes from every metaphor,   Turns the hardest data into untruth, And fills all blanks with blankness. This love shows   Itself in absence, which the stars adore. 
***
Half asleep in prayer I said the right thing  And felt a sudden pleasure come into  The room or my own body. In the dark,  Charged with a change of atmosphere, at first  I couldn’t tell my body from the room.  And I was wide awake, full of this feeling,  Alert as though I’d heard a doorknob twist,  A drawer pulled, and instead of terror knew  The intrusion of an overwhelming joy.  I had said thanks and this was the response.  But how I said it or what I said it for  I still cannot recall and I have tried  All sorts of ways all hours of the night.  Once was enough to be dissatisfied. 
***
Drunk on the Umbrian hills at dusk and drunk  On one pink cloud that stood beside the moon,  Drunk on the moon, a marble smile, and drunk,  Two young Americans, on one another,  Far from home and wanting this forever— Who needed God? We had our bodies, bread,  And glasses of a raw, green, local wine, And watched our Godless perfect darkness breed  Enormous softly burning ancient stars. Who needed God? And why do I ask now?  Because I’m older and I think God stirs In details that keep bringing back that time,  Details that are just as vivid now— Our bodies, bread, a sharp Umbrian wine. 
***
Balmy overcast nights of late September; Palms standing out in street light, house light;  Full moon penetrating the cloud-film With an explosive halo, a ring almost half the sky;  Air like a towel draped over shoulders; Lightness or gravity deferred like a moral question;  The incense in the house lit; the young people Moving from the front door into the half-dark And back, or up the stairs to glimpse the lovers’ shoes  Outside the master bedroom; the youngest speculating;  The taste of beer, familiar as salt water; Each window holding a sea view, charcoal With shifting bars of white; the fog filling in Like the haze of distance itself, pushing close, blurring. As if the passage into life were through such houses,  Surrounded by some version of ocean weather, Lit beads of fog or wind so stripped it burns the throat;  Mildew-spreading, spray-laden breezes and the beach sun  Making each grain of stucco cast a shadow; An ideal landscape sheared of its nostalgia; S. with his black hair, buck teeth, unsunned skin,  Joking and disappearing; F. doing exactly the same  But dying, a corkscrew motion through green water;  And C. not looking back from the car door, Reappearing beside the East River, rich, owned, smiling at last. Swains. and nymphs. And news that came with the sea damp,  Of steady pipe-corrosions, black corners, Moisture working through sand lots, through slab floors,  Slowly, with chemical, with molecular intricacy, Then, bursting alive: the shrieked confessions Of the wild parents; the cliff collapse; the kidnap; The cache of photos; the letter; the weapon; the haunted dream; The sudden close-up of the loved one’s degradation. Weather a part of it all, permeating and sanctifying,  Infiltrating and destroying; the sun disc,  Cool behind the veil of afternoon cloud,  With sun spots like flies crawling across it;  The slow empurpling of skin all summer;  The glorious learned flesh and the rich pallor  Of the untouched places in the first nakedness;  The working of the lesion now in late life,  Soon to be known by the body, even the one  Enduring the bareness of the inland plains,  The cold fronts out of Canada, a sickness  For home that feels no different from health. 
***
Radiant child of Leto, farworking Lord Apollo, with lyre in hand and golden plectrum, you sang to the gods   on Mount Olympus almost as soon as you were born. You sang, and the Muses sang in answer, and together   your voices so delighted all your deathless elders that their perfect happiness was made more perfect still. What was it, though, that overwhelmed them, that suffused,   astonished, even the endless ether? Was it the freshest,   most wonderful stops of breath, the flawless intervals and scales whose harmonies were mimicking in sound   the beauty of the gods themselves, or what you joined   to that, what you were singing of, our balked desires, the miseries we suffer at your indifferent hands,   devastation and bereavement, old age and death?   Farworking, radiant child, what do you know about us? Here is my father, half blind, and palsied, at the toilet,   he’s shouting at his penis, Piss, you! Piss! Piss! but the penis (like the heavenly host to mortal prayers) is deaf and dumb; here, too, my mother with her bad knee,   on the eve of surgery, hobbling by the bathroom,   pausing, saying, who are you talking to in there? and he replies, no one you would know, sweetheart.   Supernal one, in your untested mastery,   your easy excellence, with nothing to overcome, and needing nothing but the most calamitous   and abject stories to prove how powerful you are,   how truly free, watch them as they laugh so briefly, godlike, better than gods, if only for a moment in which what goes wrong is converted to a rightness,   if only because now she’s hobbling back to bed where she won’t sleep, if only because he pees at last,   missing the bowl, and has to get down on his knees   to wipe it up. You don’t know anything about us.
***
He frightens all the witches and the dragons in their lair He cues the clear blue daylight and He gives the night its dare He flaps His wings for warning and He struts atop a mare for when He crows they quiver and when He comes they flee In His coal black plumage and His bright red crown and His golden beaked fury and His calculated frown in His webbed footed glory He sends Jehovah down for when He crows they quiver and when He comes they flee O they dance around the fire and they boil the gall of wolves and they sing their strange crude melodies and play their weirder tunes and the villagers close their windows and the grave- yard starts to heave and the cross wont help their victims and the screaming fills the night and the young girls die with open eyes and the skies are lavender light but when He crows they quiver and when He comes they flee Well the sheriff is getting desperate as they go their nature’s way killing cattle smothering infants slaughtering those who block their way and the countryside swarms with numbness as their magic circle grows but when He crows they tremble and when He comes they flee Posting hex-signs on their wagons simple worried farmers pray passing laws and faking justice only feed the witches brew violet stones are rendered helpless drunken priests are helpless too but when He crows they quiver and when He comes they flee We have seen them in their ritual we have catalogued their crimes we are weary of their torture but we cannot bring them down their ancient hoodoo enemy who does the work, the trick, strikes peril in their dead fiend’s hearts and pecks their flesh to quick love Him feed Him He will never let you down for when He crows they quiver and when He comes they frown
***
i tore down my thoughts roped in my nightmares remembered a thousand curses made blasphemous vows to demons choked on the blood of hosts     ate my hat threw fits in the street got up bitchy each day told off the mailman lost many friends left parties in a huff dry fucked a dozen juke boxes made anarchist speeches in brad the falcon’s 55 (but was never thrown out) drank 10 martinis a minute until 1 day the book was finished my unspeakable terror between the covers, on you i said to the enemies of the souls well lorca, pushkin i tried but in this place they assassinate you with pussy or pats on the back, lemon chiffon between the cheeks or 2 weeks on a mile long beach. i have been the only negro on the plane 10 times this year and its only the 2nd month i am removing my blindfold and leaving the dock. the judge giggles constantly and the prosecutor invited me to dinner no forwarding address please i called it pin the tail on the devil they called it avant garde they just can't be serious these big turkeys
***
put yr cup on my tray the stewardess said 40,000 feet up. (well i’ve never done it that way. what have i got to lose.) i climb into a cab & the woman driver is singing along with Frank Sinatra “how was your flight coming in?” (another one. these americans, only one thing on their minds).
***
A high-yellow lawyer woman told me I ought to go to Europe to “broaden your per spective.” This happened at a black black cocktail party an oil portrait, Andrew Carnegie, smiling down
***
i u worry me whoever u are i know u didnt want me to come here but here i am just d same; hi-jacking yr stagecoach, hauling in yr pocket watches & mak ing u hoof it all d way to town. black bard, a robber w/ an art: i left some curses in d cash box so ull know its me listen man, i cant help it if yr thing is over, kaput,    finis no matter how u slice it dick u are done. a dead duck all out of quacks. d nagging hiccup dat goes on & on w/out a simple glass     of water for relief ii uve been teaching shakespeare for 20 years only to find d joke       on u d eavesdropping rascal who got it in d shins because he didnt know enough to keep his feet behind d cur tains: a sad-sacked head served on a platter in titus andronicus or falstaff        too fat to make a go of it        anymore iii its not my fault dat yr tradition was knocked off wop style & left in d alley w/ pricks in its mouth. i read abt it in d papers but it was no        skin off my nose wasnt me who opened d gates & allowed d rustlers to slip thru unnoticed. u ought to do something abt yr security or        mend yr fences partner dont look at me if all dese niggers are ripping it up like deadwood dick; doing art d way its never been done. mak ing wurlitzer sorry he made d piano dat will drive mozart to d tennis        courts making smith-corona feel like d red faced university dat has just delivered china        some 50 e-leben h bomb experts i didnt deliver d blow dat drove d abstract expressionists to my ladies linoleum where dey sleep beneath tons of wax & dogshit & d muddy feet of children or because some badassed blackpainter done sent french impressionism to d walls of highrise        lobbies where dey belong is not my fault martha graham will never do d jerk shes a sweet ol soul but her hips cant roll; as stiff as d greek statues she loves so much iv dese are d reasons u did me nasty j alfred prufrock, d trick u pull d in d bookstore today; stand in d corner no peaches for a week, u lemon u must blame me because yr wife is ugly. 86-d by a thousand discriminating saunas. dats why u did dat sneaky thing i wont tell d townsfolk because u hv to live here and im just passing thru v u got one thing right tho. i did say dat everytime i read william faulkner i go to sleep. fitzgerald wdnt hv known a gangster if one had snatched zelda & made her a moll tho        she wd hv been grateful i bet bonnie of clyde wrote d saga of suicide sal just as d feds were closing in. it is worth more than d collected works of ts elliot a trembling anglican whose address is now d hell dat thrilld him so last word from down there he was open ing a publishing co dat will bore d devil back to paradise vi & by d way did u hear abt grammar? cut to ribbons in a photo finish by stevie wonder, a blindboy who dances on a heel. he just came out of d slang & broke it down before millions.        it was bloody murder vii to make a long poem shorter—3 things        moleheaded lame w/4 or 5 eyes 1) yr world is riding off into d sunset 2) d chips are down & nobody will chance yr i.o.u.s. 3) d last wish was a fluke so now u hv to re turn to being a fish p.s. d enchantment has worn off dats why u didnt like my reading list—right? it didnt include anyone on it dat u cd in vite to a cocktail party & shoot a lot of        bull—right? so u want to take it out on my hide—right? well i got news for u professor nothing—i am my own brand while u must be d fantasy of        a japanese cartoonist a strangekind of dinosaurmouse i can see it all now. d leaves are running low. its d eve of extinction & dere are no holes to accept yr behind. u wander abt yr long neck probing a tree. u think its a tree but its really a trap. a cry of victory goes up in d kitchen of d world. a pest is dead. a prehis toric pest at dat. a really funnytime prehistoric pest whom we will lug into a museum to show everyone how really funny u are        yr fate wd make a good scenario but d plot is between u & charles darwin. as i said, im passing thru, just sing ing my song. get along little doggie & jazz like dat. word has it dat a big gold shipment is coming to californy. i by to ride all night if im to meet my pardners dey want me to help score d ambush
***
1 Some say that Chattanooga is the Old name for Lookout Mountain To others it is an uncouth name Used only by the uncivilised Our a-historical period sees it As merely a town in Tennessee To old timers of the Volunteer State Chattanooga is “The Pittsburgh of The South” According to the Cherokee Chattanooga is a rock that Comes to a point They’re all right Chattanooga is something you Can have anyway you want it The summit of what you are I’ve paid my fare on that Mountain Incline #2, Chattanooga I want my ride up I want Chattanooga 2 Like Nickajack a plucky Blood I’ve escaped my battle near Clover Bottom, braved the Jolly Roger raising pirates Had my near miss at Moccasin Bend To reach your summit so Give into me Chattanooga I’ve dodged the Grey Confederate sharpshooters Escaped my brother’s tomahawks with only Some minor burns Traversed a Chickamauga of my own Making, so You belong to me Chattanooga 3 I take your East Ninth Street to my Heart, pay court on your Market Street of rubboard players and organ Grinders of Haitian colors rioting And old Zip Coon Dancers I want to hear Bessie Smith belt out I’m wild about that thing in Your Ivory Theatre Chattanooga Coca-Cola’s homebase City on my mind 4 My 6th grade teacher asked me to Name the highest mountain in the world I didn’t even hesitate, “Lookout Mountain” I shouted. They laughed Eastern nitpickers, putting on the Ritz laughed at my Chattanooga ways Which means you’re always up to it To get to Chattanooga you must Have your Tennessee “She has as many lives as a cat. As to killing her, even the floods have failed you may knock the breath out of her that’s all. She will re- fill her lungs and draw a longer breath than ever” From a Knoxville editorial— 1870s 5 Chattanooga is a woman to me too I want to run my hands through her Hair of New Jersey tea and redroot Aint no harm in that Be caressed and showered in Her Ruby Falls That’s only natural Heal myself in her Minnehaha Springs 58 degrees F. all year Around. Climb all over her Ridges and hills I wear a sign on my chest “Chattanooga or bust” 6 “HOLD CHATTANOOGA AT ALL HAZARDS”—Grant to Thomas When I tasted your big juicy Black berries ignoring the rattle- Snakes they said came to Cameron Hill after the rain, I knew I Had to have you Chattanooga When I swam in Lincoln Park Listening to Fats Domino sing I found my thrill on Blueberry Hill on the loudspeaker I knew you were mine Chattanooga Chattanooga whose Howard Negro School taught my mother Latin Tennyson and Dunbar Whose Miller Bros. Department Store cheated my Uncle out of What was coming to him A pension, he only had 6 Months to go Chattanoooooooooooooooooga Chattanoooooooooooooooooga “WE WILL HOLD THIS TOWN TILL WE STARVE”-Thomas to Grant 7 To get to Chattanooga you must Go through your Tennessee I’ve taken all the scotsboros One state can dish out Made Dr. Shockley’s “Monkey Trials” The laughing stock of the Nation Capt. Marvel Dr. Sylvanias shazam Scientists running from light- ning, so Open your borders. Tennessee Hide your TVA DeSota determined, this Serpent handler is coming Through Are you ready Lookout Mountain? “Give all of my Generals what he’s drinking,” Lincoln said, when the Potomac crowd called Grant a lush 8 I’m going to strut all over your Point like Old Sam Grant did My belly full of good Tennessee Whiskey, puffing on A.05 cigar The campaign for Chattanooga Behind me Breathing a spell Ponying up for Appomattox!
***
35? I have been looking forward To you for many years now So much so that I feel you and I are old Friends and so on this day, 35 I propose a toast to Me and You 35? From this day on I swear before the bountiful Osiris that If I ever If I EVER Try to bring out the Best in folks again I Want somebody to take me Outside and kick me up and Down the sidewalk or Sit me in a corner with a Funnel on my head Make me as hard as a rock 35, like the fellow in The story about the Big one that got away Let me laugh my head off With Moby Dick as we reminisce About them suckers who went Down with the Pequod 35? I ain’t been mean enough Make me real real mean Mean as old Marie rolling her eyes Mean as the town Bessie sings about “Where all the birds sing bass” 35? Make me Tennessee mean Cobra mean Cuckoo mean Injun mean Dracula mean Beethovenian-brows mean Miles Davis mean Don’t-offer-assistance-when Quicksand-is-tugging-some-poor Dope-under-mean Pawnbroker mean Pharaoh mean That’s it, 35 Make me Pharaoh mean Mean as can be Mean as the dickens Meaner than mean When I walk down the street I want them to whisper There goes Mr. Mean “He’s double mean He even turned the skeletons In his closet out into The cold” And 35? Don’t let me trust anybody Over Reed but Just in case Put a tail on that Negro too                               February 22, 1973
***
Seems there was this Professor a member of what should be called The Good German Department Must have signed his name to 5,000 petitions in front of the Co-Op on Cedar and bought two tons of benefit cookies Blames Texas for the sorry state of the oceans Rode a Greyhound bus “Civil Rights,” Alabama, 1960 Found the long yellow war “deplorable” Believes John “Duke” Wayne’s values to be inferior to his He said, “Ishmael, I’d love to do the right thing for as you know I’m all for the right thing and against the wrong thing, but these plaster of paris busts of deceased Europeans Our secret ways Our sacred fears "These books, leather-bound 'copyright 1789’ All of these things, precious to me, gleaming like the stainless steel coffee urn in the faculty club, an original Maybeck, 1902 “I’d stand up for Camelot by golly, even if it meant shooting all the infidels in the world,” he said reaching into his desk drawer “Why, I might even have to shoot you, Ishmael” Staring down the cold tunnel of a hard .38 I thought Most people are to the right when it comes to where they must eat and lay their heads!***
My Dear Khomeini: I read your fourteen thousand dollar ad asking me why the Vatican waited all of these years to send an envoy to complain about conditions in Iran You’re right, we should have sent one when the Shah was in power, look, I’m in total agreement with you Khomeini, that Christ, had he lived in Iran under the Shah, would have led the biggest damned revolt you ever saw Believe me, Khomeini, I knew about the Shah’s decadence, his extravagance his misdeeds, and how he lolled about in luxury with Iran’s loot I knew about the trail of jewels which led to his Dad’s capture but a fella has to eat and so when David Rockefeller asked me to do something how could I refuse? You can afford to be holier than thou What is it, 30 dollars per barrel these days? You must be bathing in oil While each day I suffer a new indignity You know that rock record they made me do? It’s 300 on the Charts which is about as low as you can get. And I guess you read where I had to call in all those Cardinals and for the first time reveal the Vatican budget? I had to just about get down on my hands and knees to get them to co-sign for a loan The Vatican jet has a mechanical problem and the Rolls-Royce needs a new engine The staff hasn’t been paid in months and the power company is threatening to turn off the candles To add to that, the building inspector has listed us as having 30,000 code violations I’m telling you, Khomeini, that so many people are leaving the church I have this nightmare where I wake up one day in Los Angeles and I’m the only one left Pretty soon we’ll be one of those cults you read about in the San Francisco Chronicle ***
The grocery had provided him with boxes of rotten lettuce He was loading them onto a yellow pick-up truck He was a frail white man and wore a plaid woolen shirt and frayed dungarees I was sitting in a gray chevrolet rent-a-dent “I have eight adult geese and twenty-six ducks,” he said and i said “I’ll bet you have a big management problem,” and he said “They’re no trouble at all. My wife raised two of them in the house. When she goes near their pen the geese waddle towards her and nibble the lettuce out of her hand” “I'd never think of killing them” he said “They keep me out of the bars”
***
Shoes, secret face of my inner life:   Two gaping toothless mouths, Two partly decomposed animal skins   Smelling of mice nests. My brother and sister who died at birth   Continuing their existence in you, Guiding my life Toward their incomprehensible innocence. What use are books to me When in you it is possible to read   The Gospel of my life on earth And still beyond, of things to come? I want to proclaim the religion I have devised for your perfect humility   And the strange church I am building   With you as the altar. Ascetic and maternal, you endure: Kin to oxen, to Saints, to condemned men,   With your mute patience, forming The only true likeness of myself. 
***
With only his dim lantern   To tell him where he is And every time a mountain   Of fresh corpses to load up Take them to the other side Where there are plenty more I’d say by now he must be confused   As to which side is which I’d say it doesn’t matter No one complains he’s got Their pockets to go through In one a crust of bread in another a sausage Once in a long while a mirror   Or a book which he throws   Overboard into the dark river   Swift and cold and deep
***
This strange thing must have crept  Right out of hell. It resembles a bird’s foot Worn around the cannibal’s neck. As you hold it in your hand, As you stab with it into a piece of meat, It is possible to imagine the rest of the bird:  Its head which like your fist Is large, bald, beakless, and blind.
***
They’re waiting to be murdered,  Or evicted. Soon They expect to have nothing to eat.  In the meantime, they sit. A violent pain is coming, they think. It will start in the heart And climb into the mouth. They’ll be carried off in stretchers, howling. Tonight they watch the window  Without exchanging a word.  It has rained, and now it looks  Like it’s going to snow a little. I see him get up to lower the shades.  If their window stays dark, I know his hand has reached hers Just as she was about to turn on the lights.
***
How much death works,  No one knows what a long  Day he puts in. The little  Wife always alone Ironing death’s laundry.  The beautiful daughters  Setting death’s supper table.  The neighbors playing  Pinochle in the backyard  Or just sitting on the steps  Drinking beer. Death,  Meanwhile, in a strange  Part of town looking for  Someone with a bad cough, But the address is somehow wrong,  Even death can’t figure it out  Among all the locked doors ...    And the rain beginning to fall.  Long windy night ahead.  Death with not even a newspaper  To cover his head, not even  A dime to call the one pining away,  Undressing slowly, sleepily,  And stretching naked  On death’s side of the bed.
***
I grew up bent over   a chessboard. I loved the word endgame. All my cousins looked worried. It was a small house near a Roman graveyard.   Planes and tanks shook its windowpanes. A retired professor of astronomy   taught me how to play. That must have been in 1944. In the set we were using, the paint had almost chipped off   the black pieces. The white King was missing   and had to be substituted for. I’m told but do not believe   that that summer I witnessed   men hung from telephone poles. I remember my mother   blindfolding me a lot. She had a way of tucking my head   suddenly under her overcoat. In chess, too, the professor told me,   the masters play blindfolded,   the great ones on several boards   at the same time.
***
Great are the Hittites. Their ears have mice and mice have holes. Their dogs bury themselves and leave the bones To guard the house. A single weed holds all their storms  Until the spiderwebs spread over the heavens. There are bits of straw in their lakes and rivers  Looking for drowned men. When a camel won’t pass  Through the eye of one of their needles, They tie a house to its tail. Great are the Hittites.  Their fathers are in cradles, their newborn make war.  To them lead floats, a leaf sinks. Their god is the size  Of a mustard seed so that he can be quickly eaten. They also piss against the wind,  Pour water in a leaky bucket. Strike two tears to make fire, And have tongues with bones in them, Bones of a wolf gnawed by lambs.     * They are also called mound builders,  They are called Asiatic horses That will drink on the Rhine, they are called My grandmother’s fortune-telling, they are called  You can’t take it to the grave with you. It’s that hum in your left ear, A sigh coming from deep within you, A dream in which you keep falling forever,  The hour in which you sit up in bed As though someone has shouted your name. No one knows why the Hittites exist,  Still, when two are whispering  One of them is listening. Did they catch the falling knife? They caught it like a fly with closed mouths.  Did they balance the last egg? They struck the egg with a bone so it won’t howl.  Did they wait for dead man’s shoes? The shoes went in at one ear and out the other.  Did they wipe the blood from their mousetraps?  They burnt the blood to warm themselves.  Are they cold with no pockets in their shrouds?  If the sky falls, they shall have clouds for supper. What do they have for us To put in our pipes and smoke? They have the braid of a beautiful girl  That drew a team of cattle And the engraving of him who slept  With dogs and rose with fleas  Searching for its trace in the sky.     * And so there are fewer and fewer of them now.  Who wrote their name on paper And burnt the paper? Who put snake bones  In their pillows? Who threw nail parings  In their soup? Who made them walk Under the ladder? Who stuck pins In their snapshots? The wart of warts and his brother evil eye.  Bone-lazy and her sister rabbit’s-foot.  Cross-your-fingers and their father dog star.  Knock-on-wood and his mother hellfire. Because the tail can’t wag the cow. Because the woods can’t fly to the dove.  Because the stones haven’t said their last word.  Because dunghills rise and empires fall.     * They are leaving behind All the silver spoons Found inside their throats at birth,  A hand they bit because it fed them, Two rats from a ship that is still sinking,  A collection of various split hairs,  The leaf they turned over too late.     * All that salt cast over the shoulder, All that bloody meat traveling under the saddles of nomads ...  Here comes a forest in wolf’s clothing,  The wise hen bows to the umbrella. When the bloodshot evening meets the bloodshot night,  They tell each other bloodshot tales. That bare branch over them speaks louder than words.  The moon is worn threadbare. I repeat: lean days don’t come singly,  It takes all kinds to make the sun rise. The night is each man’s castle.  Don’t let the castle out of the bag. Wind in the valley, wind in the high hills,  Practice will make this body fit this bed.     * May all roads lead  Out of a sow’s ear  To what’s worth  Two in the bush.
***
This admirable gadget, when it is Wound on a string and spun with steady force,  Maintains its balance on most any smooth Surface, pleasantly humming as it goes. It is whirled not on a constant course, but still  Stands in unshivering integrity For quite some time, meaning nothing perhaps  But being something agreeable to watch,  A silver nearly silence gleaning a still- ness out of speed, composing unity  From spin, so that its hollow spaces seem  Solids of light, until it wobbles and  Begins to whine, and then with an odd lunge  Eccentric and reckless, it skids away  And drops dead into its own skeleton.
***
The oldest sister, her two hands on the table,  about to push herself up, stares with grim  determination at the affronting dishes,  waiting, it seems, until the middle sister  finishes her story, so she can clear them away.  Her gaze so tense with purpose she can almost  see germs spawning in the mess of white fish  flaking from the spines, the smear of egg yolk  and the torn rolls disfiguring the china;  as if the meal, the moment it is over, the meal she made a point of telling them  she shopped for, got up early to prepare,  were now inedible, because uneaten. It’s no great comfort either that her brother  sitting opposite holds up a flared match  over the pipe from which smoke rolls away  across the table like a phantom mold in and around the open tub of butter, the gouged block of cream cheese and the coffee cups;  so in a moment when she finally does stand she’ll say again, as always, For love or money  in my mouth I’d never put such filth,  and he’ll say, winking at the middle sister,  That’s what she said on her honeymoon. The youngest sister is sitting on the couch behind the table; her face—sheer disengagement,  toneless and still—appears to hang suspended  beyond the oldest sister’s shoulder, far  enough away for no one yet to notice  as her legs cross that the ashtray in her lap  spills ash over the sunflowers of her housedress.  Or that the cigarette between her fingers  sags loosely and is dangling while the hand  lifts like a puppet’s on a string of smoke. Her death is just three months away. Even though it’s summer (otherwise the brother and middle sister would be home,  in Florida), summer and late morning— with sunlight only just now catching on a corner of the window shut behind them, shut against the smog, the steady traffic and the panicked blare and drawn-out whining fade  of sirens—the apartment is still quiet, still cool enough, right now, to keep the body  in the wavering frail zone of what it needs to be forgotten, so they can sit like this together, with the oldest sister’s sharp eye on the wrecked meal, the brother and sister talking: Listen, she would be saying, listen, Charlie,  her elbows on the table, both hands open,  the body fashioned to the voice’s weary  What can you do? What are ya gonna do?  in answer to some story of a cousin’s  sudden illness (And he was my age, just like that one day he’s shaving with the toothpaste), or a friend’s death (That one, she didn’t care  how sick she got, she always had her hair done),  his back pain, her arthritis, or the daughter  who won’t diet (And she’d be such a beauty!);  after his joke about the nurse, and hers  about the bedpan, Listen, they each say,  Listen, what are ya gonna do?                                               “The Schmo, he never should’ve married her, for Christ sake,  until he told her that he had a problem,  that was his first mistake, then he goes  throwing away his pills, because he’s happy  he doesn’t need them anymore, the schmo,  so of course what happens is she wakes up  and finds him weeping at the kitchen table, just weeping, he doesn’t know why, he won’t eat,  won’t get dressed, says he’s quittin’ his job, you know, nuts, nuts, so naturally she leaves him,  the poor schmo, and he’s such a good boy . . . ” All of the harm that’s imperceptibly but surely coming for them (the way the sun burns brick by brick all morning toward the window  like a slow fuse)—all of the bad news now is in the body only enough to hold the middle sister’s two hands open, shrug her shoulders in a way they recognize  as hers, the way their mother did; as if  all trouble were, for now, no heavier  than the familiar voice repeating, Listen,  Listen it could be worse; So who’s to say?; What was, was; When your number’s up—like old charms  woven around each story till they’ve made  what happens what was only meant to happen,  coherent with fate, fated as family. After the funeral three months from now,  they’ll have to listen to the oldest sister tell them they had no business moving away  to Florida, and Irene sick as she was.  And selfish. She was selfish, that one. After  all those years of living with that bum, her husband, may his cheap soul rest in peace,  didn’t she deserve a little pleasure? And anyway, what could be done for her?  Didn’t the stroke just make it easier for her to sit all day, and smoke, and not care  ashes were falling on the couch, the carpet; her bathrobe filthy, filthy? Oh it was terrible— and now they will hear the old unfairnesses,  old feuds and resentments come to her voice  like consolation, like a mother helping  her recite the story of that last bad day— all that smoke, and running in with nothing  but the dishtowel to beat down the flames,  and Irene, just Irene, just sitting there, the queen of Sheba—What difference did it make  since she was there, she was always there,  her big sister, to clean up the mess? Only three months, and yet it could be years,  or decades, for the sun has only just now caught in the window, and its bright plaque warms  the air so gradually that none of them can know it’s warming, or that soon someone,  distracted by a faint sheen prickling the skin,  will break the story, look up toward the window  and, startled by the full glare, check the time.  Right now, though, the future is a luxury  of instances in which the cigarette, raised halfway to the lips, will go on rising.  Nothing bad, right now, can happen here  except as news, bad news the brother and sister  mull and rehearse, puzzle and fret until  it seems the very telling of it is what keeps them safe. And safe, too, the oldest sister,  dreaming of all the perishables sealed,  wrapped up and hurried back into the fridge’s  uncontaminated airlessness, dreaming of how the soapsuds curdle and slide  over the dishes in a soothing fury, not minding that it scalds her hands to hold  each plate and cup and bowl under the hot,  hard jet of water, if it gets them clean.
***
Dear old equivocal and closest friend,  Grand Vizier to a weak bewildered king,  Now we approach The Ecclesiastean Age Where the heart is like to go off inside your chest  Like a party favor, or the brain blow a fuse  And the comic-book light-bulb of Idea black out  Forever, the idiot balloon of speech  Go blank, and we shall know, if it be knowing,  The world as it was before language once again; Mighty Fortress, maybe already mined  And readying to blow up grievances  About the lifetime of your servitude, The body of this death one talkative saint  Wanted to be delivered of (not yet!),  Aggressively asserting your ancient right  To our humiliation by the bowel Or the rough justice of the elderly lecher’s  Retiring from this incontinence to that; Dark horse, it’s you we’ve put the money on  Regardless, the parody and satire and The nevertheless forgiveness of the soul  Or mind, self, spirit, will or whatever else The ever-unknowable unknown is calling itself This time around—shall we renew our vows?  How should we know by now how we might do  Divorced? Homely animal, in sickness and health,  For the duration; buddy, you know the drill.
***
Long scree of pill bottles          spilling over the tipped brim  of the wicker basket, fifty or more,           a hundred, your name on every one and under          your name the brusque rune of instructions— which ones to take, how many, and often,          on what days, with or without food, before or          after eating, impossible toward the end to keep them all straight,           not even with your charts, your calendars, the bottles           ranged in sequence along the kitchen  counter—you always so          efficient, organized, never without a plan,          even when planning had come down  to this and nothing more, for there was           still a future in it, though the future reached          only from one bottle to the next, from pill to pill, each one          another toehold giving way          beneath you on the steep slope  you never stopped struggling against,           unable not to climb, and then, when climbing          was impossible, not to try slowing  the quickening descent. You had          descended now, your body thinned to the machine          of holding on, while I exhausted  by the vigil, with all your medicine          spread before me, looked for something, anything          at all to help me sleep.  To help me for a short while anyway          not be aware of you, your gaunt hand          clutching the guardrail, your eyes  blind, flitting, scanning, it seemed,           the air above them for their own sight, and the whimper           far back in the throat, the barely  audible continuous          half-cry half- wheeze I couldn’t hear and not think          you were saying something, though  I couldn’t make out what. I wanted          to sleep, I wanted if just for that one night          to meet you there on that steep slope,  the two of us together, facing          opposite directions, I, because I wasn’t          dying, looking down, desiring  what you, still looking up, resisted,           because you were.
***
And does the heart grow old? You know  In the indiscriminate green Of summer or in earliest snow A landscape is another scene, Inchoate and anonymous, And every rock and bush and drift  As our affections alter us Will alter with the season’s shift. So love by love we come at last, As through the exclusions of a rhyme,  Or the exactions of a past, To the simplicity of time, The antiquity of grace, where yet  We live in terror and delight  With love as quiet as regret  And love like anger in the night.
***
What never comes when called.                                              What hides when held.  Guest           most at home where least                                               expected. Vagrant  balm of Gilead.                                What, soon as here,                                                              becomes the body’s native ground and,                                            soon as not,  its banishment.                         Coming and going,                                                    indifferent,  magisterial.                    My lovely daughter— walking me to the car                                  to say goodbye  the day I left                       to keep watch at my brother’s bedside—                suddenly                             singing “I feel pretty, oh so                             pretty”                                         as she raised  her arms up in a loose oval                                         over her head  and pirouetted all along the walk. Savage           and magisterial—                                      the joy of it, the animal candor of                                  each arabesque, each leaping turn and counterturn,                                                     her voice now wobbly                 with laughter,                                        “And I pity any girl              who isn’t me                                tonight.” Savagely beautiful,                               not so much like  the lion that the camera                                      freezes                                                  in mid- pounce, claws                      outstretched for the stumbling                                                                    antelope, as like the herd                          escaping                                      that the camera pans to, zig-                      zagging,                                   swerving as one,  their leaping strides now                                        leaping higher,                                                                faster,  even after,                 it seems,                                the fear subsides— after the fear and                             the relief                                              they keep  on running                 for nothing but                                           the joy of running,  though           it could be                                any one of them  is running                   from its fallen                                            mother or father,  sister or brother,                             across the wide                                                       savanna,  under a bright sun                               into fresher grass.
***
Here they are. The soft eyes open.   If they have lived in a wood It is a wood. If they have lived on plains It is grass rolling Under their feet forever. Having no souls, they have come,   Anyway, beyond their knowing.   Their instincts wholly bloom   And they rise. The soft eyes open. To match them, the landscape flowers,   Outdoing, desperately Outdoing what is required: The richest wood, The deepest field. For some of these, It could not be the place It is, without blood. These hunt, as they have done, But with claws and teeth grown perfect, More deadly than they can believe.   They stalk more silently, And crouch on the limbs of trees,   And their descent Upon the bright backs of their prey May take years In a sovereign floating of joy.   And those that are hunted   Know this as their life, Their reward: to walk Under such trees in full knowledge   Of what is in glory above them,   And to feel no fear, But acceptance, compliance.   Fulfilling themselves without pain At the cycle’s center, They tremble, they walk   Under the tree, They fall, they are torn,   They rise, they walk again.
***
Off Highway 106 At Cherrylog Road I entered   The ’34 Ford without wheels,   Smothered in kudzu, With a seat pulled out to run Corn whiskey down from the hills, And then from the other side   Crept into an Essex With a rumble seat of red leather   And then out again, aboard   A blue Chevrolet, releasing   The rust from its other color, Reared up on three building blocks.   None had the same body heat; I changed with them inward, toward   The weedy heart of the junkyard,   For I knew that Doris Holbrook   Would escape from her father at noon And would come from the farm   To seek parts owned by the sun   Among the abandoned chassis,   Sitting in each in turn As I did, leaning forward As in a wild stock-car race In the parking lot of the dead.   Time after time, I climbed in   And out the other side, like   An envoy or movie star Met at the station by crickets.   A radiator cap raised its head, Become a real toad or a kingsnake   As I neared the hub of the yard,   Passing through many states,   Many lives, to reach Some grandmother’s long Pierce-Arrow   Sending platters of blindness forth From its nickel hubcaps And spilling its tender upholstery On sleepy roaches, The glass panel in between   Lady and colored driver   Not all the way broken out, The back-seat phone Still on its hook. I got in as though to exclaim,   “Let us go to the orphan asylum,   John; I have some old toys For children who say their prayers.” I popped with sweat as I thought   I heard Doris Holbrook scrape Like a mouse in the southern-state sun   That was eating the paint in blisters   From a hundred car tops and hoods.   She was tapping like code, Loosening the screws,   Carrying off headlights,   Sparkplugs, bumpers, Cracked mirrors and gear-knobs,   Getting ready, already, To go back with something to show Other than her lips’ new trembling   I would hold to me soon, soon,   Where I sat in the ripped back seat Talking over the interphone,   Praying for Doris Holbrook   To come from her father’s farm And to get back there With no trace of me on her face To be seen by her red-haired father Who would change, in the squalling barn,   Her back’s pale skin with a strop, Then lay for me In a bootlegger’s roasting car With a string-triggered I2-gauge shotgun   To blast the breath from the air. Not cut by the jagged windshields,   Through the acres of wrecks she came   With a wrench in her hand, Through dust where the blacksnake dies   Of boredom, and the beetle knows   The compost has no more life. Someone outside would have seen   The oldest car's door inexplicably   Close from within: I held her and held her and held her,   Convoyed at terrific speed By the stalled, dreaming traffic around us,   So the blacksnake, stiff With inaction, curved back Into life, and hunted the mouse With deadly overexcitement,   The beetles reclaimed their field   As we clung, glued together, With the hooks of the seat springs   Working through to catch us red-handed   Amidst the gray breathless batting That burst from the seat at our backs.   We left by separate doors Into the changed, other bodies Of cars, she down Cherrylog Road   And I to my motorcycle Parked like the soul of the junkyard Restored, a bicycle fleshed With power, and tore off Up Highway 106, continually   Drunk on the wind in my mouth,   Wringing the handlebar for speed,   Wild to be wreckage forever.
***
Allegiance is assigned  Forever when the mind  Chooses and stamps the will.  Thus, I must love you still  Through good and ill. But though we cannot part  We may retract the heart  And build such privacies  As self-regard agrees  Conduce to ease. So manners will repair  The ravage of despair Which generous love invites,  Preferring quiet nights  To vain delights.
***
Farm boys wild to couple With anything      with soft-wooded trees   With mounds of earth      mounds   Of pinestraw      will keep themselves off   Animals by legends of their own:   In the hay-tunnel dark And dung of barns, they will   Say    I have heard tell That in a museum in Atlanta   Way back in a corner somewhere   There’s this thing that’s only half   Sheep      like a woolly baby Pickled in alcohol      because   Those things can’t live.      his eyes Are open      but you can’t stand to look   I heard from somebody who ... But this is now almost all   Gone. The boys have taken   Their own true wives in the city, The sheep are safe in the west hill Pasture      but we who were born there Still are not sure. Are we, Because we remember, remembered In the terrible dust of museums? Merely with his eyes, the sheep-child may   Be saying      saying          I am here, in my father’s house.          I who am half of your world, came deeply          To my mother in the long grass          Of the west pasture, where she stood like moonlight          Listening for foxes. It was something like love          From another world that seized her          From behind, and she gave, not lifting her head            Out of dew, without ever looking, her best          Self to that great need. Turned loose, she dipped her face            Farther into the chill of the earth, and in a sound            Of sobbing      of something stumbling          Away, began, as she must do,          To carry me. I woke, dying,          In the summer sun of the hillside, with my eyes          Far more than human. I saw for a blazing moment            The great grassy world from both sides,          Man and beast in the round of their need,          And the hill wind stirred in my wool,          My hoof and my hand clasped each other,          I ate my one meal          Of milk, and died          Staring. From dark grass I came straight                    To my father’s house, whose dust          Whirls up in the halls for no reason          When no one comes      piling deep in a hellish mild corner,            And, through my immortal waters,          I meet the sun’s grains eye          To eye, and they fail at my closet of glass.          Dead, I am most surely living          In the minds of farm boys: I am he who drives          Them like wolves from the hound bitch and calf          And from the chaste ewe in the wind.          They go into woods      into bean fields      they go          Deep into their known right hands. Dreaming of me,            They groan      they wait      they suffer          Themselves, they marry, they raise their kind.***
Moth-force a small town always has,             Given the night.                                                 What field-forms can be,          Outlying the small civic light-decisions over                A man walking near home?                                                                          Men are not where he is         Exactly now, but they are around him    around him like the strength Of fields.    The solar system floats on     Above him in town-moths.                                                          Tell me, train-sound,     With all your long-lost grief,                                                          what I can give.       Dear Lord of all the fields                                                          what am I going to do?                                         Street-lights, blue-force and frail As the homes of men, tell me how to do it    how     To withdraw    how to penetrate and find the source         Of the power you always had                                                             light as a moth, and rising        With the level and moonlit expansion     Of the fields around, and the sleep of hoping men.        You?    I?    What difference is there?    We can all be saved        By a secret blooming. Now as I walk The night    and you walk with me    we know simplicity      Is close to the source that sleeping men        Search for in their home-deep beds.        We know that the sun is away    we know that the sun can be conquered      By moths, in blue home-town air.           The stars splinter, pointed and wild. The dead lie under The pastures.    They look on and help.    Tell me, freight-train,                             When there is no one else    To hear. Tell me in a voice the sea          Would have, if it had not a better one: as it lifts,           Hundreds of miles away, its fumbling, deep-structured roar                Like the profound, unstoppable craving             Of nations for their wish.                                                                     Hunger, time and the moon:          The moon lying on the brain                                                                     as on the excited sea    as on           The strength of fields. Lord, let me shake            With purpose.    Wild hope can always spring            From tended strength.    Everything is in that.             That and nothing but kindness.    More kindness, dear Lord Of the renewing green.    That is where it all has to start:          With the simplest things. More kindness will do nothing less              Than save every sleeping one              And night-walking one          Of us.                          My life belongs to the world. I will do what I can.
***
So I would hear out those lungs,   The air split into nine levels, Some gift of tongues of the whistler In the invalid’s bed: my mother,   Warbling all day to herself The thousand variations of one song; It is called Buckdancer’s Choice.   For years, they have all been dying   Out, the classic buck-and-wing men Of traveling minstrel shows;   With them also an old woman   Was dying of breathless angina, Yet still found breath enough   To whistle up in my head   A sight like a one-man band, Freed black, with cymbals at heel,   An ex-slave who thrivingly danced   To the ring of his own clashing light Through the thousand variations of one song   All day to my mother’s prone music,   The invalid’s warbler’s note, While I crept close to the wall   Sock-footed, to hear the sounds alter,   Her tongue like a mockingbird’s break Through stratum after stratum of a tone   Proclaiming what choices there are   For the last dancers of their kind, For ill women and for all slaves Of death, and children enchanted at walls   With a brass-beating glow underfoot, Not dancing but nearly risen   Through barnlike, theatrelike houses   On the wings of the buck and wing.
***
The states when they black out and lie there rolling    when they turn To something transcontinental    move by    drawing moonlight out of the great One-sided stone hung off the starboard wingtip    some sleeper next to An engine is groaning for coffee    and there is faintly coming in Somewhere the vast beast-whistle of space. In the galley with its racks Of trays    she rummages for a blanket    and moves in her slim tailored Uniform to pin it over the cry at the top of the door. As though she blew The door down with a silent blast from her lungs    frozen    she is black Out finding herself    with the plane nowhere and her body taken by the throat The undying cry of the void    falling    living    beginning to be something That no one has ever been and lived through    screaming without enough air Still neat    lipsticked    stockinged    girdled by regulation    her hat Still on    her arms and legs in no world    and yet spaced also strangely With utter placid rightness on thin air    taking her time    she holds it In many places    and now, still thousands of feet from her death she seems To slow    she develops interest    she turns in her maneuverable body To watch it. She is hung high up in the overwhelming middle of things in her Self    in low body-whistling wrapped intensely    in all her dark dance-weight Coming down from a marvellous leap    with the delaying, dumfounding ease Of a dream of being drawn    like endless moonlight to the harvest soil Of a central state of one’s country    with a great gradual warmth coming Over her    floating    finding more and more breath in what she has been using For breath    as the levels become more human    seeing clouds placed honestly Below her left and right    riding slowly toward them    she clasps it all To her and can hang her hands and feet in it in peculiar ways    and Her eyes opened wide by wind, can open her mouth as wide    wider and suck All the heat from the cornfields    can go down on her back with a feeling Of stupendous pillows stacked under her    and can turn    turn as to someone In bed    smile, understood in darkness    can go away    slant    slide Off tumbling    into the emblem of a bird with its wings half-spread Or whirl madly on herself    in endless gymnastics in the growing warmth Of wheatfields rising toward the harvest moon.    There is time to live In superhuman health    seeing mortal unreachable lights far down seeing An ultimate highway with one late priceless car probing it    arriving In a square town    and off her starboard arm the glitter of water catches The moon by its one shaken side    scaled, roaming silver    My God it is good And evil    lying in one after another of all the positions for love Making    dancing    sleeping    and now cloud wisps at her no Raincoat    no matter    all small towns brokenly brighter from inside Cloud    she walks over them like rain    bursts out to behold a Greyhound Bus shooting light through its sides    it is the signal to go straight Down like a glorious diver    then feet first    her skirt stripped beautifully Up    her face in fear-scented cloths    her legs deliriously bare    then Arms out    she slow-rolls over    steadies out    waits for something great To take control of her    trembles near feathers    planes head-down The quick movements of bird-necks turning her head    gold eyes the insight- eyesight of owls blazing into the hencoops    a taste for chicken overwhelming Her    the long-range vision of hawks enlarging all human lights of cars Freight trains    looped bridges    enlarging the moon racing slowly Through all the curves of a river    all the darks of the midwest blazing From above. A rabbit in a bush turns white    the smothering chickens Huddle    for over them there is still time for something to live With the streaming half-idea of a long stoop    a hurtling    a fall That is controlled    that plummets as it wills    turns gravity Into a new condition, showing its other side like a moon    shining New Powers    there is still time to live on a breath made of nothing But the whole night    time for her to remember to arrange her skirt Like a diagram of a bat    tightly it guides her    she has this flying-skin Made of garments    and there are also those sky-divers on tv    sailing In sunlight    smiling under their goggles    swapping batons back and forth And He who jumped without a chute and was handed one by a diving Buddy. She looks for her grinning companion    white teeth    nowhere She is screaming    singing hymns    her thin human wings spread out From her neat shoulders    the air beast-crooning to her    warbling And she can no longer behold the huge partial form of the world    now She is watching her country lose its evoked master shape    watching it lose And gain    get back its houses and peoples    watching it bring up Its local lights    single homes    lamps on barn roofs    if she fell Into water she might live    like a diver    cleaving    perfect    plunge Into another    heavy silver    unbreathable    slowing    saving Element: there is water    there is time to perfect all the fine Points of diving    feet together    toes pointed    hands shaped right To insert her into water like a needle    to come out healthily dripping And be handed a Coca-Cola    there they are    there are the waters Of life    the moon packed and coiled in a reservoir    so let me begin To plane across the night air of Kansas    opening my eyes superhumanly Bright    to the damned moon    opening the natural wings of my jacket By Don Loper    moving like a hunting owl toward the glitter of water One cannot ***
In a stable of boats I lie still, From all sleeping children hidden.   The leap of a fish from its shadow   Makes the whole lake instantly tremble.   With my foot on the water, I feel   The moon outside Take on the utmost of its power. I rise and go out through the boats.   I set my broad sole upon silver, On the skin of the sky, on the moonlight,   Stepping outward from earth onto water   In quest of the miracle This village of children believed   That I could perform as I dived For one who had sunk from my sight.   I saw his cropped haircut go under.   I leapt, and my steep body flashed   Once, in the sun. Dark drew all the light from my eyes.   Like a man who explores his death By the pull of his slow-moving shoulders,   I hung head down in the cold, Wide-eyed, contained, and alone Among the weeds, And my fingertips turned into stone   From clutching immovable blackness.   Time after time I leapt upward Exploding in breath, and fell back   From the change in the children’s faces   At my defeat. Beneath them I swam to the boathouse   With only my life in my arms To wait for the lake to shine back At the risen moon with such power   That my steps on the light of the ripples   Might be sustained. Beneath me is nothing but brightness   Like the ghost of a snowfield in summer.   As I move toward the center of the lake,   Which is also the center of the moon,   I am thinking of how I may be The savior of one Who has already died in my care.   The dark trees fade from around me.   The moon’s dust hovers together.   I call softly out, and the child’s Voice answers through blinding water.   Patiently, slowly, He rises, dilating to break The surface of stone with his forehead.   He is one I do not remember Having ever seen in his life. The ground I stand on is trembling   Upon his smile. I wash the black mud from my hands.   On a light given off by the grave   I kneel in the quick of the moon   At the heart of a distant forest   And hold in my arms a child   Of water, water, water.
***
And now the green household is dark.   The half-moon completely is shining   On the earth-lighted tops of the trees.   To be dead, a house must be still. The floor and the walls wave me slowly;   I am deep in them over my head.   The needles and pine cones about me Are full of small birds at their roundest,   Their fists without mercy gripping Hard down through the tree to the roots   To sing back at light when they feel it.   We lie here like angels in bodies, My brothers and I, one dead, The other asleep from much living, In mid-air huddled beside me. Dark climbed to us here as we climbed Up the nails I have hammered all day Through the sprained, comic rungs of the ladder   Of broom handles, crate slats, and laths Foot by foot up the trunk to the branches   Where we came out at last over lakes Of leaves, of fields disencumbered of earth   That move with the moves of the spirit.   Each nail that sustains us I set here; Each nail in the house is now steadied By my dead brother’s huge, freckled hand.   Through the years, he has pointed his hammer   Up into these limbs, and told us That we must ascend, and all lie here.   Step after step he has brought me,   Embracing the trunk as his body, Shaking its limbs with my heartbeat,   Till the pine cones danced without wind   And fell from the branches like apples.   In the arm-slender forks of our dwelling I breathe my live brother’s light hair.   The blanket around us becomes As solid as stone, and it sways. With all my heart, I close The blue, timeless eye of my mind.   Wind springs, as my dead brother smiles   And touches the tree at the root; A shudder of joy runs up The trunk; the needles tingle;   One bird uncontrollably cries. The wind changes round, and I stir   Within another’s life. Whose life? Who is dead? Whose presence is living?   When may I fall strangely to earth, Who am nailed to this branch by a spirit?   Can two bodies make up a third? To sing, must I feel the world’s light?   My green, graceful bones fill the air   With sleeping birds. Alone, alone And with them I move gently. I move at the heart of the world.
***
They will soon be down To one, but he still will be For a little while    still will be stopping The flakes in the air with a look, Surrounding himself with the silence Of whitening snarls. Let him eat The last red meal of the condemned To extinction, tearing the guts From an elk. Yet that is not enough For me. I would have him eat The heart, and from it, have an idea Stream into his gnarling head That he no longer has a thing To lose, and so can walk Out into the open, in the full Pale of the sub-Arctic sun Where a single spruce tree is dying Higher and higher. Let him climb it With all his meanness and strength. Lord, we have come to the end Of this kind of vision of heaven, As the sky breaks open Its fans around him and shimmers And into its northern gates he rises Snarling    complete    in the joy of a weasel With an elk’s horned heart in his stomach Looking straight into the eternal Blue, where he hauls his kind. I would have it all My way: at the top of that tree I place The New World’s last eagle Hunched in mangy feathers    giving Up on the theory of flight. Dear God of the wildness of poetry, let them mate To the death in the rotten branches, Let the tree sway and burst into flame And mingle them, crackling with feathers, In crownfire. Let something come Of it    something gigantic    legendary Rise beyond reason over hills Of ice    screaming    that it cannot die, That it has come back, this time On wings, and will spare no earthly thing: That it will hover, made purely of northern Lights, at dusk    and fall On men building roads: will perch On the moose’s horn like a falcon Riding into battle    into holy war against Screaming railroad crews: will pull Whole traplines like fibres from the snow In the long-jawed night of fur trappers. But, small, filthy, unwinged, You will soon be crouching Alone, with maybe some dim racial notion Of being the last, but none of how much Your unnoticed going will mean: How much the timid poem needs The mindless explosion of your rage, The glutton’s internal fire    the elk’s Heart in the belly, sprouting wings, The pact of the “blind swallowing Thing,” with himself, to eat The world, and not to be driven off it Until it is gone, even if it takes Forever. I take you as you are And make of you what I will, Skunk-bear, carcajoy, bloodthirsty Non-survivor.                         Lord, let me die    but not die Out.
***
The sea here used to look As if many convicts had built it, Standing deep in their ankle chains,   Ankle-deep in the water, to smite The land and break it down to salt.   I was in this bog as a child When they were all working all day   To drive the pilings down. I thought I saw the still sun Strike the side of a hammer in flight And from it a sea bird be born   To take off over the marshes. As the gray climbs the side of my head   And cuts my brain off from the world, I walk and wish mainly for birds, For the one bird no one has looked for To spring again from a flash Of metal, perhaps from the scratched Wedding band on my ring finger.   Recalling the chains of their feet, I stand and look out over grasses At the bridge they built, long abandoned, Breaking down into water at last,   And long, like them, for freedom Or death, or to believe again That they worked on the ocean to give it The unchanging, hopeless look   Out of which all miracles leap.
***
Beginning to dangle beneath The wind that blows from the undermined wood,         I feel the great pulley grind,       The thread I cling to lengthen   And let me soaring and spinning down into marble,       Hooked and weightlessly happy       Where the squared sun shines Back equally from all four sides, out of stone         And years of dazzling labor,       To land at last among men Who cut with power saws a Parian whiteness       And, chewing slow tobacco,       Their eyebrows like frost, Shunt house-sized blocks and lash them to cables         And send them heavenward       Into small-town banks, Into the columns and statues of government buildings,         But mostly graves.       I mount my monument and rise Slowly and spinningly from the white-gloved men         Toward the hewn sky       Out of the basement of light, Sadly, lifted through time’s blinding layers         On perhaps my tombstone       In which the original shape Michelangelo believed was in every rock upon earth         Is heavily stirring,       Surprised to be an angel, To be waked in North Georgia by the ponderous play         Of men with ten-ton blocks       But no more surprised than I To feel sadness fall off as though I myself         Were rising from stone       Held by a thread in midair, Badly cut, local-looking, and totally uninspired,         Not a masterwork       Or even worth seeing at all But the spirit of this place just the same,         Felt here as joy.
***
I have just come down from my father. Higher and higher he lies Above me in a blue light Shed by a tinted window. I drop through six white floors And then step out onto pavement. Still feeling my father ascend, I start to cross the firm street, My shoulder blades shining with all The glass the huge building can raise. Now I must turn round and face it, And know his one pane from the others. Each window possesses the sun As though it burned there on a wick. I wave, like a man catching fire. All the deep-dyed windowpanes flash, And, behind them, all the white rooms They turn to the color of Heaven. Ceremoniously, gravely, and weakly, Dozens of pale hands are waving Back, from inside their flames. Yet one pure pane among these Is the bright, erased blankness of nothing. I know that my father is there, In the shape of his death still living. The traffic increases around me Like a madness called down on my head. The horns blast at me like shotguns, And drivers lean out, driven crazy— But now my propped-up father Lifts his arm out of stillness at last. The light from the window strikes me And I turn as blue as a soul, As the moment when I was born. I am not afraid for my father— Look! He is grinning; he is not Afraid for my life, either, As the wild engines stand at my knees Shredding their gears and roaring, And I hold each car in its place For miles, inciting its horn To blow down the walls of the world That the dying may float without fear In the bold blue gaze of my father. Slowly I move to the sidewalk With my pin-tingling hand half dead At the end of my bloodless arm. I carry it off in amazement, High, still higher, still waving, My recognized face fully mortal, Yet not; not at all, in the pale, Drained, otherworldly, stricken, Created hue of stained glass. I have just come down from my father.
***
How time reverses  The proud in heart!  I now make verses  Who aimed at art. But I sleep well.  Ambitious boys Whose big lines swell  With spiritual noise, Despise me not! And be not queasy  To praise somewhat:  Verse is not easy. But rage who will. Time that procured me  Good sense and skill  Of madness cured me.
***
Plato, despair! We prove by norms How numbers bear Empiric forms, How random wrong Will average right If time be long And error slight, But in our hearts Hyperbole Curves and departs To infinity. Error is boundless. Nor hope nor doubt, Though both be groundless, Will average out.
***
I am no shepherd of a child’s surmises. I have seen fear where the coiled serpent rises, Thirst where the grasses burn in early May And thistle, mustard, and the wild oat stay. There is dust in this air. I saw in the heat Grasshoppers busy in the threshing wheat. So to this hour. Through the warm dusk I drove To blizzards sifting on the hissing stove, And found no images of pastoral will, But fear, thirst, hunger, and this huddled chill.
***
There is no stillness in this wood. The quiet of this clearing Is the denial of my hearing The sounds I should. There is no vision in this glade. This tower of sun revealing The timbered scaffoldage is stealing Essence from shade. Only my love is love’s ideal. ***
You are the problem I propose, My dear, the text my musings glose: I call you for convenience love. By definition you’re a cause Inferred by necessary laws— You are so to the saints above. But in this shadowy lower life I sleep with a terrestrial wife And earthy children I beget. Love is a fiction I must use, A privilege I can abuse, And sometimes something I forget. Now, in the heavenly other place Love is in the eternal mind The luminous form whose shade she is, A ghost discarnate, thought defined. She was so to my early bliss, She is so while I comprehend The forms my senses apprehend, And in the end she will be so. Her whom my hands embrace I kiss, Her whom my mind infers I know. The one exists in time and space And as she was she will not be; The other is in her own grace And is She is eternally. Plato! you shall not plague my life. I married a terrestrial wife. And Hume! she is not mere sensation In sequence of observed relation. She has two forms—ah, thank you, Duns!—, I know her in both ways at once. I knew her, yes, before I knew her, And by both means I must construe her, And none among you shall undo her.
***
Speak to her heart!   That manic force   When wits depart   Forbids remorse. Dream with her dreaming   Until her lust Seems to her seeming   An act of trust! Do without doing!   Love’s wilful potion   Veils the ensuing, And brief, commotion.
***
If wisdom, as it seems it is,Be the recovery of some blissFrom the conditions of disaster—Terror the servant, man the master—It does not follow we should seek Crises to prove ourselves unweak. Much of our lives, God knows, is error, But who will trifle with unrest? These fools who would solicit terror, Obsessed with being unobsessed; Professionals of experienceWho have disasters to withstand them As if fear never had unmanned them, Flaunt a presumptuous innocence.I have preferred indifference.
***
After some years Bohemian came to this—This Maenad with hair down and gaping kiss Wild on the barren edge of under fifty. She would finance his art if he were thrifty.
***
This Humanist whom no beliefs constrained Grew so broad-minded he was scatter-brained.
***
In the thirtieth year of life I took my heart to be my wife, And as I turn in bed by night I have my heart for my delight. No other heart may mine estrange For my heart changes as I change, And it is bound, and I am free, And with my death it dies with me.
***
The plane tilts in to Nashville,  coming over the green lights  like a toy train skipping past  the signals on a track. The city is livid with lights, as if the weight of all the people  shooting down her arteries  had inflamed them. It's Friday night, and people are home for the homecomings.  As I come into the terminal, a young black man, in a vested gray suit,  paces in the florid Tennessee air, breaks into a run like a halfback in open field, going past the delirious faces,  past the poster of Molly Bee in her shiny chaps, her hips tilted forward  where the guns would be, her legs set, as if she would run, as if she were a cheerleader who doffs her guns on Saturday afternoon and careens down the sidelines after some broken field runner,  who carries it in, for now, for all the state of Tennessee with its nut-smelling trees, its stolid little stone walls set out under thick blankets of leaves,  its crisp lights dangling on the porches of homes that top the graveled driveways,  where people who cannot yodel or yell  putter in the grave October afternoons,  waiting for Saturday night and the lights  that spatter on Molly Bee's silver chaps.  I don't want to think of them, or even of the broken field runner in the terminal,  still looking for his girl, his pocket full of dates and parties, as I come into this Friday night of homecomings  and hobble over the highway in a taxi  that has its radio tuned to country music.  I come up to the campus, with a large wreath jutting up under the elegant dormitories, where one girl sits looking down at the shrieking cars,  as the lights go out, one by one, around her  and the laughter drifts off, rising, rising,  as if it would take flight away from the livid arteries of Nashville. Now, in sleep, I leave my brass-headed bed,  and see her enter with tall singers, they in African shirts, she in a robe.  She sits among them, as a golden lance  catches her, suddenly chubby, with soft lips  and unhurried eyes, quite still in the movement  around her, waiting, as the other voices fade,  as the movement stops, and starts to sing,  her voice moving up from its tart entrance until it swings as freely as an ecstatic dancer's foot, rises and plays among the windows it would with angels and falls,  almost visible, to return to her, and leave her shaking with the tears  I'm ashamed to release, and leave her  twisting there on that stool with my shame  for the livid arteries, the flat Saturdays,  the inhuman homecomings of Nashville.  I kneel before her. She strokes my hair,  as softly as she would a cat's head,  and goes on singing, her voice shifting  and bringing up the Carolina calls,  the waterboy, the railroad cutter, the jailed,  the condemned, all that had been forgotten  on this night of homecomings, all that had been misplaced in those livid arteries.  She finishes, and leaves, her shy head tilted and wrinkled in the green-tinged lights of the still campus.  I close my eyes and listen, as she goes out to sing this city home.
***
I write my God in blue. I run my gods upstream on flimsy rafts. I bathe my goddesses in foam, in moonlight. I take my reasons from my mother's snuff breath,  or from an old woman, sitting with a lemonade,  at twilight, on the desert's steps. Brown by day and black by night, my God has wings that open to no reason. He scutters from the touch of old men's eyes,  scutters from the smell of wisdom, an orb  of light leaping from a fire. Press him he bleeds. When you take your hand to sacred water,  there is no sign of any wound. And so I call him supreme, great artist,  judge of time, scholar of all living event,  the possible prophet of the possible event.  Blind men, on bourbon, with guitars,  blind men with their scars dulled by kola,  blind men seeking the shelter of a raindrop,  blind men in corn, blind men in steel,  reason by their lights that our tongues  are free, our tongues will redeem us.  Speech is the fact, and the fact is true.  What is moves, and what is moving is.  We cling to these contradictions. We know we will become our contradictions,  our complex body's own desire. Yet speech is not the limit of our vision.  The ear entices itself with any sound.  The skin will caress whatever tone  or temperament that rises or descends.  The bones will set themselves to a dance.  The blood will argue with a bird in flight. The heart will scale the dew from an old chalice,  brush and thrill to an old bone. And yet there is no sign to arrest us                                      from the possible. We remain at rest there, in transit from our knowing to our knowledge. So I would set a limit where I meet my logic.  I would clamber from my own cave into the curve of sign, an alphabet of transformation, the clan's cloak of reason.  I am good when I am in motion, when I think of myself at rest in the knowledge of my moving, when I have the vision of my mother at rest, in moonlight, her lap the cradle of my father's head.  I am good when I trade my shells, and walk from boundary to boundary,  unarmed and unafraid of another's speech.  I am good when I learn the world through the touch of my present body.  I am good when I take the cove of a cub                                              into my care. I am good when I hear the changes in my body  echo all my changes down the years, when what I know indeed is what I would                                               know in deed. I am good when I know the darkness of all light, and accept the darkness, not as sign, but as my body.  This is the A of absolutes, the logbook of judgments, the good sign.
***
In a morning coat,hands locked behind your back,you walk gravely along the lines in your head.These others stand with you, squinting the city into place, yet cannot see what you see, what you would seea vision of these paths, laid out like a star,or like a body,the seed vibrating within itself, breaking into the open,dancing up to stop at the end of the universe.I say your vision goes as far as this, the egg of the world,where everything remains, and moves,holding what is most against it against itself,moving, as though it knew its end, against death.In that order,the smallest life, the small event take shape.Yes, even here at this point, Amma's plan consumes you,the prefigured man, Nommo, the son of God.I call you into this time,back to that spotand read these prefigurations into your mind,and know it could not be strange to you to stand in the dark and emptiness of a city not your vision alone.Now, I have searched the textsand forms of cities that burned,that decayed, or gave their children away, have been picking at my skin,watching my hand move,feeling the weight and shuttle of my body, listening with an ear as large as God's to catch some familiar tone in my voice. Now, I am here in your city,trying to find that spotwhere the vibration starts.There must be some mistake.Over the earth, in an open space,you and I step to the timeof another ceremony. These people, changed,but still ours,shake another myth from that egg.Some will tell youthat beginnings are onlypossible here,that only the clamor of these drumscould bring our God to earth.A city, like a life,must be made in purity.So they call you,knowing you are intimate with stars,to create this city, this body.So they call you,knowing you must purge the ground.“Sir, suffer me to recall to your mind that time, in which the arms and tyranny of the British crown were exerted, with every powerful effort in order to reduce you to a state of servitude: look back, I entreat you, on the variety of dangers to which you were exposed; reflect on that time, in which every human aid appeared unavailable, and in which even hope and fortitude wore the aspect of inability to the conflict, and you cannot but be led to a serious and grateful sense of your miraculous and providential preservation; you cannot but acknowledge, that the present freedom and tranquility which you enjoy you have mercifully received, and that it is the peculiar blessing of Heaven.”***
Old now, your eyes nearly blank  from plotting the light's movement over the years,  you clean your Almanac and place it next to the heart of this letter.  I have you in mind, giving a final brush and twist  to the difficult pages, staring down the shape of the numbers  as though you would find a flaw  in their forms. Solid, these calculations verify your body on God's earth.  At night, the stars submit themselves to the remembered way you turn them;  the moon gloats under your attention. I, who know so little of stars, whose only acquaintance with the moon  is to read a myth, or to listen  to the surge of songs the women know,  sit in your marvelous reading  of all movement, of all relations. So you look into what we see  yet cannot see, and shape and take a language  to give form to one or the other,  believing no form will escape,  no movement appear, nor stop,  without explanation, believing no reason is only reason,  nor without reason. I read all of this into your task,  all of this into the uneasy  reproof of your letter. Surely, there must be a flaw. These perfect calculations fall apart. There are silences that no perfect number can retrieve, omissions no perfect line could catch.  How could a man but challenge God's impartial distributions? How could a man sit among the free and ordered movements of stars, and waters, beasts and birds,  each movement seen or accounted for,  and not know God jealous, and not know that he himself must be? So you go over the pages again, looking for the one thing that will not reveal itself, judging what you have received, what you have shaped, believing it cannot be strange to the man you address. But you are strange to him —your skin, your tongue, the movement of your body, even your mysterious ways with stars.  You argue here with the man and God,  and know that no man can be right,  and know that no God will argue right.  Your letter turns on what the man knows, on what God, you think, would have us know.  All stars will forever move under your gaze,  truthfully, leading you from line to line,  from number to number, from truth to truth,  while the man will read your soul's desire,  searcher, searching yourself, losing the relations.
***
Death knocks all night at my door. The soul answers, and runs from the water in my throat.  Water will sustain me when I climb                                    the steep hill that leads to a now familiar place. I began, even as a child, to learn water's order,  and, as I grew intact, the feel of its warmth in a new sponge, of its weight in a virgin towel.  I have earned my wine in another's misery,  when rum bathed a sealed throat and cast its seal on the ground. I will be bound, to the one who leads me away,  by the ornaments on my wrists, the gold dust  in my ears, below my eye and tied to my                         loincloth in a leather pouch.  They dress me now in my best cloth,  and fold my hands, adorned with silk,                             against my left cheek.  Gold lies with me on my left side. Gold has become the color of distance,                                and of your sorrow. Sorrow lies, red clay on my brow. Red pepper caresses my temples. I am adorned in the russet-brown message  the soul brings from its coming-to-be.  There is a silken despair in my body that grief shakes from it, a cat's voice, controlled by palm wine                                  and a widow's passion. It is time to feed the soul          —a hen, eggs, mashed yams— and encourage the thirst resting near the right hand I see before me.                   Always I think of death.                             I cannot eat.                   I walk in sadness, and I die. Yet life is the invocation sealed in the coffin,  and will walk through our wall, passing and passing and passing,                      until it is set down, to be lifted from this body's habitation.  I now assume the widow's pot, the lamp that will lead me through solitude,  to the edge of my husband's journey. I hold three stones upon my head, darkness I will release when I run from the dead, with my eyes turned away                      toward another light. This is the day of rising. A hut sits in the bush, sheltered by summe,  standing on four forked ends. We have prepared for the soul's feast  with pestle, mortar, a strainer, three  hearthstones, a new pot and new spoon.  Someone has stripped the hut's body  and dressed it with the edowa. Now, when the wine speaks and the fire has lifted its voice, the dead will be clothed in hair,                         the signs of our grief. Sun closes down on an intensity of ghosts.  It is time to close the path. It is time for the snail's pace of coming again into life,                with the world swept clean,                the crying done, and our ordinary garments decent in the dead one's eyes.
***
Each instant comes with a price, the blue-edged bill  on the draft of a bird almost incarnadine,  the shanked ochre of an inn that sits as still  as the beavertail cactus it guards (the fine  rose of that flower gone as bronze as sand),  the river's chalky white insistence as it  moves past the gray afternoon toward sunset.  Autumn feels the chill of a late summer lit  only by goldenrod and a misplaced strand  of blackberries; deplores all such sleight of hand;  turns sullen, selfish, envious, full of regret. Someone more adept would mute its voice. The spill  of its truncated experience would shine less bravely and, out of the dust and dunghill  of this existence (call it hope, in decline), as here the blue light of autumn falls, command  what is left of exhilaration and fit this season's unfolding to the alphabet of turn and counterturn, all that implicit  arc of a heart searching for a place to stand.  Yet even that diminished voice can withstand  the currying of its spirit. Here lies—not yet. If, and only if, the leafless rose he sees, or thinks he sees, flowered a moment ago, this endangered heart flows with the river that flees  the plain, and listens with eye raised to the slow  revelation of cloud, hoping to approve  himself, or to admonish the rose for slight  transgressions of the past, this the ecstatic  ethos, a logic that seems set to reprove  his facility with unsettling delight. Autumn might be only desire, a Twelfth Night  gone awry, a gift almost too emphatic. Logic in a faithful light somehow appeases  the rose, and stirs the hummingbird's vibrato.  By moving, I can stand where the light eases  me into the river's feathered arms, and, so,  with the heat of my devotion, again prove  devotion, if not this moment, pure, finite.  Autumn cradles me with idiomatic certainty, leaves me nothing to disapprove. I now acknowledge this red moon, to requite  the heart alone given power to recite its faith, what a cradled life finds emblematic.
***
If you undo your do you would be strange. Hair has been on my mind.  I used to lean in the doorway and watch my stony woman wind the copper through the black, and play with my understanding, show me she cóuld  take a cup of river water, and watch it shimmy, watch it change, turn around and become ash bone.  Wind in the cottonwoods wakes me  to a day so thin its breastbone  shows, so paid out it shakes me free  of its blue dust. I will arrange  that river water, bottom juice.  I conjure my head in the stream  and ride with the silk feel of it as my woman bathes me, and shaves  away the scorn, sponges the grit  of solitude from my skin, laves  the salt water of self-esteem  over my feathering body. How like joy to come upon me  in remembering a head of hair  and the way water would caress  it, and stress beauty in the flair  and cut of the only witness to my dance under sorrow's tree. This swift darkness is spring's first hour. I carried my life, like a stone,  in a ragged pocket, but I had a true weaving song, a sly  way with rhythm, a healing tone.
***
Cigarettes in my mouth to puncture blisters in my brain.  My bass a fine piece of furniture.  My fingers soft, too soft to rattle  rafters in second-rate halls. The harmonies I could never learn  stick in Ayler's screams. An African chant chokes us. My image shot. If you look off over the Hudson, the dark cooperatives spit at the dinghies  floating up the night.                 A young boy pisses on lovers rolling against each other  under a trackless el.          This could have been my town, with light strings that could stand a tempo.                   Now,                   it's the end                   of an ethnic dream. I've grown intellectual, go on accumulating furniture and books,  damning literature, writing “for myself,”  calculating the possibilities that someone  will love me, or sleep with me. Eighteen-year-old girls come back from the Southern  leers and make me cry.                   Here, there are                   coffee shops, bars,                   natural tonsorial parlors,                    plays, streets,                   pamphlets, days, sun,                   heat, love, anger,                    politics, days, and sun. Here, we shoot off every day to new horizons,  coffee shops, bars, natural tonsorial parlors,  plays, streets, pamphlets, days, sun, heat, love, anger, politics, days, and sun.                   It is the end of an ethnic dream.                    My bass a fine piece of furniture.                    My brain blistered.
***
The trees are crystal chandeliers,  and deep in the hollow a child pits its voice against the rain. The city screams its prayers  at the towers in the distance. Those guitars again. And the Catholic mantis  clutching at the sky, a pearl of a city, cuando se duerme. Subway blue boys now ride shotgun against my freedom and my fears.  Pistols snap like indignant heels, at midday, and we stand at the docks,  singing a farewell we'd soon forget. Hymns resound against that dome  entre la fiesta y la agonia. Worms feed on its concrete, or we pluck them out of bodies. But time to forget. Or remember the easiness  of leaving easy loves, disappearing in the arms of secret dreams. We'll sit at the end  of a banquet board, and powder our tutored wigs, flip the pages of gentility in the rainy season. English lessons over tea  for the price of memory.          Il mio supplizio           è quando          non mi credo           in armonia. They say the time is not much different. The strange and customary turns  of living may coincide. In Mariachi Plaza travelers sing elegies to the beauty  of revolutions and tranquillity. From the opposite side of the river,  coming in, the skyline seems scrubbed  and pointed ominously into the darkness. I walk through the market,  kissing colors in a murmur  of self-induced petition. Two spires, lying against the night, are suddenly armed to sail. The water foams against the bottom,  the way it looked when I left that dying city Only a turning to feel the bark slope off into the night, with a promise to return.          Un di, s'io non andrò sempre fuggendo           di gente in gente, mi vedrai seduto          su la tua pietra, o fratel mio, gemendo           it fior dei tuoi gentili anni caduto. From line to line,  from point to point, is an architect's end of cities. But I lie down to a different turbulence and a plan of transformation.
***
It should have a woman's name, something to tell us how the green skirt of land                                            has bound its hips. When the day lowers its vermilion tapestry over the west ridge,  the water has the sound of leaves shaken in a sack,  and the child's voice that you have heard below                                                           sings of the sea. By slow movements of the earth's crust, or is it that her hip bones have been shaped  by a fault of engineering? Some coquetry cycles this blue edge, a spring ready to come forth to correct                                      love's mathematics. Saturday rises immaculately. The water's jade edge plays against corn-colored  picnic baskets, rose and lemon bottles, red balloons,  dancers in purple tights, a roan mare out of its field.  It is not the moment to think of Bahia and the gray mother with her water explanation.  Not far from here, the city, a mass of swift water  in its own depression, licks its sores. Still, I would be eased by reasons. Sand dunes in drifts. Lava cuts its own bed at a mountain base.  Blindness enters where the light refuses to go.  In Loch Lomond, the water flowers with algae  and a small life has taken the name of a star. You will hear my star-slow heart empty itself with a light-swift pitch  where the water thins to a silence. And the woman who will not be named  screams in the birth of her fading away.
***
1 In the region of rain and cloud, I live in shade, under the moss mat of days bruised                         purple with desire. My dominion is a song in the wide ring of water.  There, I run to and fro, braiding the logical act             in the birth of an Ear of Corn,  polychromatic story I will now tell in the weaving, power's form in motion, a devotion to the unstressed. Once, I wreathed around a king, became a fishing net, a maze                “a deadly wealth of robe.” Mothers who have heard me sing take heart;  I always prick them into power. 2 Y vengo alzando al viento la roja flor de invierno.  (I lift the red flower of winter into the wind.)         —Poesía Náhuatl***
Extravagant sweep                          of clear sky                                            darkening in the big picture window                                      beside the bed, lights here and there                                already flashing all across the city down below us—                                               Ellen and the girls out somewhere,                                           you and I alone, you with your eyes closed,                                        I with a drink in hand: you suddenly in character,                                         your voice a wraith’s voice,                          faint, stumbling,                                                    slurry with morphine,                      and yet                                still artful                                                  as ever, even if the art                       was obvious, the dying brother                       playing the dying brother— Do you think                   you have a problem                                              with that?***
Did you ever have a family?                                                        Dark  dining room,                   bright kitchen,                                         white steam from the big pot my mother’s stirring  reaching in wavy tendrils to her face,  around her face, all the way around  to me at the table, then beyond me  into the darkness where my brother is. Were you ever a child?                                              I’m hungry  but I know we’ll                          eat soon,                                                so even the hunger’s sweet. Did you ever really have a brother?                                                                   He’s singing  there in the dark                            corner                                      beside the stereo, the volume turned down so low  all we hear is him, his voice, and  his eyes are closed so that there’s  nothing around him anywhere that might reveal he isn’t who the song insists he is. And that is?                            Irresistible, unforgettable,                                    someone                                                      to whom  as in imaginary gardens where “the nectarine and curious peach into my hands themselves do reach,” love comes as soon as called, comes just as dreamed. Did any of this ever happen?                                                     The hunger’s sweet,           it’s as if                            the song weaves through the fragrance of the braiding  steam from him to me to her to me to him because her eyes are closed now too; her slippered feet tap, caper a soft shoe while the ladle sways in her hand as she stirs. Were you ever a child?                                              I know I’ll eat soon.                                   Did you ever really have a brother? You should have                                   heard him,                                                  his voice was  unforgettable, irresistible, his voice was an imaginary garden woven through with fragrance.  Did you ever have a family?                                                    Their eyes are closed.  That’s how I know                                   we’re there                                                       inside it,  it’s made of sound and steam that weaves between dark dining room, bright kitchen.  We’re there because I’m hungry,  and we’ll all be eating soon together, and the hunger’s sweet.
***
When he was my age and I was already a boy  my father made a machine in the garage.  A wired piece of steel with many small and beautiful welds ground so smooth they resembled rows of pearls. He went broke with whatever it was.  He held it so carefully in his arms.  He carried it foundry to foundry.  I think it was his harp, I think it was what he longed to make  with his hands for the world. He moved it finally from the locked closet  to the bedroom to the garage again where he hung it on the wall until I climbed and pulled it down and rubbed it clean and tried to make it work.
***
Two hands lie still, the hairy and the white, And soon down ladders of reflected light The sleepers climb in silence. Gradually They separate on paths of long ago,Each winding on his arm the unpleasant clew That leads, live as a nerve, to memory.But often when too steep her dream descends, Perhaps to the grotto where her father bends To pick her up, the husband wakes as though He had forgotten something in the house. Motionless he eyes the room that glows With the little animals of light that prowlThis way and that. Soft are the beasts of light But softer still her hand that drifts so white Upon the whiteness. How like a water-plant It floats upon the black canal of sleep, Suspended upward from the distant deep In pure achievement of its lovely want!Quietly then he plucks it and it foldsAnd is again a hand, small as a child’s.He would revive it but it barely stirsAnd so he carries it off a little wayAnd breaks it open gently. Now he can see The sweetness of the fruit, his hand eats hers.
***
. . . and then of course the weeping: some demurely, some flamboyantly. Those elegiac tears, if shedenough, will alter a face and the personbehind the face. We all know that erosionis a mighty thing, and even—for example—the seemingly permanent, hard-black Mississippi banks undo and slip south. In a sense, the deltaat New Orleans—the land gone silt, and rebuilt—is the Mississippi’s second thought. “My pet, your wiles have altered my earlier obstinacy,and the vision of you in your luxury stateroom beckons;I shall join you for your voyage on the Gigantic—what? oh. Titanic”—is a tragic second thought.A happy one: when Skyler and I decided to try again to “save the marriage.” Now we’re lazing in a pour of Sunday morning light as orangely voluptuousas marmalade. A simile’s a first thought,then an equaled next. She slips back into sleep,and now I’m reading about the night that shady London dandy Charles Augustus Howell (1869) unshoveled the graveat Highgate, broke the coffin, and looted her bone breastof “the book in question, bound in rough gray calf, and with red edges to the leaves,” on eager orders from Rossetti —who’d had second thoughts in seven years, desiringto publish now a volume of his verses (1870, Poems). Lizzie’s death-stenched pages were saturatedwith disinfectant by a medical practitioner “whois drying them leaf by leaf”—and then they joined the worldof woven radish baskets, bobbered fishing skeins, and god dolls in their second life as art on a museum wall; a world where the “conversion pool” saw swimmers step in white robesfrom its farther end, reborn to new religion; and the lumberingland animals said no, and gave up legs, and so their legs rolled up like stored-away and useless rugs inside them, and they returned to the waters, and birthed and breached in the waters,and made the waters their orchestral glory,and spouted out their great Ionic columns of air and water in the touch of the changing mind of Earth,that’s sunlit at timesand at other times darkened.
***
Snow hurries the strawberries from the bush. Star-wet water rides  you into summer,  into my autumn. Your cactus hands  are at my heart again.  Lady, I court my dream of you in lilies and in rain.  I vest myself in your oldest memory  and in my oldest need.  And in my passion you are the deepest blue  of the oldest rose.  Star circle me an axe.  I cannot cut myself from any of your emblems.  It will soon be cold here, and dark here; the grass will lie flat to search for its spring head. I will bow again in the winter of your eyes. If there is music, it will be the weather's bells to call me to the abandoned chapel of your simple body.
***
Never mind what you think. The old man did not rush Recklessly into the coop the last minute.  The chickens hardly stirred For the easy way he sang to them.  Red sun is burning out Past slag heaps of the mill. The old man  Touches the blade of his killing knife  With his fat thumb. I’m in the backyard on a quilt Spread out under the heavy dark plums  He cooks for his whiskey. He walks among the hens singing His chicken song way down in his throat  Until he finds the one who’s ready  And he holds her to his barrel chest. What did you think? Did you think you just jerk the bird  From her roost and hack her head off? Beyond the coop I see the fleeting white dress of my grandmother  As she crosses and recrosses the porch To fill the bucket with scalding water. How easy the feathers will come When she drowns them for plucking  And clouds the air with a stench I can’t stand not to breathe. I’m not even a boy yet but I watch  The old man sing out into the yard, His knife already at the chicken’s throat  When everything begins to spin in my world— He slices off the head without a squawk,  And swirls the bird in circles, a fine  Blood spray fanning out far enough  To reach me where I wait Obediently, where I can’t stop watching  The head the old man picks up, His free hand becomes a puppet chicken Clucking at me, pecking my head with the cold beak  Until I cry for him to stop, Until he pins me down, clucking, laughing, blood  All over his hands. He did it so I would remember him I tell myself all these years later. He did it because it was his last summer  Among us. In August he didn’t feel the fly  Come into his cancerous ear and lay its eggs. He didn’t feel the maggots hatch As he sat dazed with pills in the sun. He pecked my head and laughed out of love,  Out of love he snatched me roughly to his chest  And sang his foreign songs way, Way down in his throat.
***
Night enters the Plaza, step by step, in the singular  flaring of lamps on churro carts, taco stands,  benches set with deep bowls of pozole,  on rugs embroidered with relics, crosses, bones,                            pamphlets, dream books. Around this Cathedral, there is an order never shaken;  all our eyes and postures speak of the certainty                            of being forever in place. These are the ones who always hear the veiled day fall, the street tile's serpentine hiss under the evening's drone.  Compadre, not all have come from Reforma, along Madero.  There are those whose spotless white manta tells me  they are not from here—as now, you see, a village  wedding party come to engage the virgin's peace. This evening, in the Zócalo, lanterns become candles, or starlight, whatever recalls a woman, beating her clothes on rocks in a village stream. At her side, a man buckets the muddy water for his stove.  What does the spirit say, in its seating, when such impurity can console, and the slipped vowels of an unfamiliar name                                 rise from the shallows?  Lovers meet here, and carry consummation's black weed into dawn,  and meet again when the full moon,                   on its flamboyant feet, surges  over the mud floor of a barrio Saturday night.  She, of the rock, has offered the water man beans, flour tortillas, cebollas encurtidas and atole,  a hand for the bell dance that rings all night,  the surprise of knowing the name of the horse that waits in the shadows when the dance has gone. She knows this room, where every saint has danced,  revolves on its own foundation, and that the noon heat ache beneath her hair  guides her through a love's lost steps. Her love lies deeper than a heart's desire,  far beyond even her hand's intention, when midnight at the feast sings with the singular arrow that flies by day,                                   a sagitta mortis. Now, in her presence, I always return to hands,  parts of that “unwieldly flesh about our souls,” where the life of Fridays, the year of Lent, the wilderness,  lies and invites another danger. I sit at the mass, and mark the quail movement of the priests' hands,  as they draw submission from us. The long night of atonement that burrs our knees                                    feeds those hands. But there are other hands—our own, yet another's— in the mortar, in the glass,              tight with blood and innocence. A cathedral moment may last for centuries,  given to us as a day, and a day, and half a day,  as a baroque insistence lying over classic form, as the womb from which the nation rises whole.  Inside there, the nation walks the Chinese rail,  arrives at the Altar of Pardon,                                     lingers, goes on, to the grotto where the kings stand in holy elation.  Perhaps, this reticent man and woman will find  that moment of exhilaration in marriage, born on the mud floor when they entered each other  for the good hidden in each, in flesh that needs                                            no propitiation. There must be a “Canticle, a love-song, an Epithalamion, a marriage song of God, to our souls,  wrapped up, if we would open it, and read it.”              Adorar es dar para recibir. How much we have given to this Cathedral's life.  How often we have heard prophecies of famine,  or war, or pestilence, advocacies of labor  and fortune that have failed to sustain. Compadre, I wish I were clever enough to sleep  in a room of saints, and close my senses to the gaming, the burl of grilled meat and pulque,  the sweet talk of political murders, the corrido  laughter that follows a jefe to his bed, all these silences, all these intimations  of something still to be constructed. But forgive me for knowing this,                 that I have been touched by fire, and that, even in spiritual things, nothing is perfect.  And this I understand, in the Cathedral grotto, where the kings have buckled on  their customary deeds, the darkest lady has entered.  Be still, and hear the singing, while Calliope encounters                                                              the saints. The wedding party, austerely figured in this man and woman,  advances to the spot where the virgin                          once sat to receive us.
***
After the storm, after the rain stopped pounding,  We stood in the doorway watching horses  Walk off lazily across the pasture’s hill. We stared through the black screen, Our vision altered by the distance So I thought I saw a mist Kicked up around their hooves when they faded  Like cut-out horses Away from us. The grass was never more blue in that light, more  Scarlet; beyond the pasture Trees scraped their voices into the wind, branches  Crisscrossed the sky like barbed wire But you said they were only branches. Okay. The storm stopped pounding. I am trying to say this straight: for once  I was sane enough to pause and breathe  Outside my wild plans and after the hard rain  I turned my back on the old curses. I believed  They swung finally away from me ... But still the branches are wire And thunder is the pounding mortar,  Still I close my eyes and see the girl  Running from her village, napalm  Stuck to her dress like jelly, Her hands reaching for the no one  Who waits in waves of heat before her. So I can keep on living, So I can stay here beside you, I try to imagine she runs down the road and wings  Beat inside her until she rises  Above the stinking jungle and her pain Eases, and your pain, and mine. But the lie swings back again. The lie works only as long as it takes to speak  And the girl runs only as far As the napalm allows Until her burning tendons and crackling  Muscles draw her up into that final position Burning bodies so perfectly assume. Nothing  Can change that; she is burned behind my eyes  And not your good love and not the rain-swept air  And not the jungle green Pasture unfolding before us can deny it.
***
There was another life of cool summer mornings, the dogwood air and the slag stink so gray like our monsoon which we loved for the rain and cool wind until the rot came into us. And I remember the boys we were the evening of our departure, our mothers waving through the train’s black pluming exhaust; they were not proud in their tears of our leaving, so don’t tell me to shut up about the war or I might pull something from my head, from my head, from my head that you wouldn’t want to see and whoever the people are might be offended. From the green country you reconstruct in your brain, from the rubble and stink of your occupation, there is no moving out. A sweet boy who got drunk and brave on our long ride into the State draws a maze every day on white paper, precisely in his room of years as if you could walk into it. All day he draws and imagines his platoon will return from the burning river where he sent them sixteen years ago into fire. He can’t stop seeing the line of trees explode in white phosphorous blossoms and the liftship sent for them spinning uncontrollably beyond hope into the Citadel wall. Only his mother comes these days, drying the fruit in her apron or singing the cup of hot tea into his fingers which, like barbed wire, web the air.
***
Because this evening Miss Hoang Yen sat down with me in the small tiled room of her family house I am unable to sleep. We shared a glass of cold and sweet water.   On a blue plate her mother brought us cake and smiled her betel-black teeth at me   but I did not feel strange in the house my country had tried to bomb into dust.   In English thick and dazed as blood she told me how she watched our planes   cross her childhood’s sky, all the children of Hanoi carried in darkness to mountain hamlets, Nixon’s   Christmas bombing. She let me hold her hand,   her shy unmoving fingers, and told me how afraid she was those days and how this fear   had dug inside her like a worm and lives   inside her still, won’t die or go away. And because she’s stronger, she comforted me,   said I’m not to blame, the million sorrows alive in her gaze. With the dead we share no common rooms. With the frightened we can’t think straight;   no words can bring the burning city back.   Outside on Hung Dao Street I tried to say good-bye and held her hand   too long so she looked back through traffic   towards her house and with her eyes   she told me I should leave. All night I ached for her and for myself   and nothing I could think or pray would make it stop. Some birds sang morning   home across the lake. In small reed boats   the lotus gatherers sailed out among their resuming white blossoms.                                            Hanoi, 1990
***
A boy who knew enough to save for something  like the whim that took me downtown on the bus  one lost Saturday morning of my mother’s birthday,  I sat in the back where the gasoline smell  made me dizzy and I closed my eyes but didn’t  think of her, only of myself, basking in the light  and love that would fall down on me when I  handed her the box and she untied the bow to save and lifted something shining out and held it up before us  like a promise taking shape for once in her hands,  though I didn’t know what to buy, the bus door  hissing behind me because I’m in some kind of  state now, a trance that comes when you pull  at the cords of light that connect the mother to the boy,  the 1959 department store opening up before me like a jeweled city.  In lingerie I found myself surrounded by those torsos sheened in silk,  dreaming my mother, feeling the silk against me,  the two of us moving through a cloudy room  in a dance I can’t remember until shame comes.  From out of nowhere the matron frowned,  asked what I wanted, hovered over me. Confused and afraid I whispered, without thinking, The black hose with rhinestones down the seams please and pointed to the pair across the room  stretched over legs on the glass counter  as if about to step off and I saw her in my mind slip them on,  her skirt hiked above the garters, the sun  catching in her tangled hair until the matron made a sound in her throat  and looked at me with eyes that said  What’s wrong with you dirty boy. All the way home a sweet ache rocked me,  the silver package riding my lap like a heavy wrong thing I couldn’t give up no matter how it dragged me down to a place where I could barely breathe or see or feel.  Whatever happened that spinning afternoon— she ran her fingers over the rhinestone seams or she didn’t, she wore them out into an evening or kept them forever in her drawer of impossible things— doesn’t matter. I would find my way into the light of another woman into whose arms I fall nights my fingers can’t tear through the dark  that eats me, the silk stretched across her breasts,  the need for something womanly to raise me up  pounding in my head until I curl in sleep  away from those longings, ancient and blue.
***
That night we drank warm whiskey   in our parked car beyond woods now lost to the suburbs,   I fell in love with you. What waited was the war   like a bloody curtain,   and a righteous moment   when the lovely boy’s spine was snapped, then the long falling into hell. But lately, you’ve been calling me back through the years of bitter silence to tell me of another river of blood   and of the highland’s howl at dusk of human voices   blasted into ecstasy. That night in sweet Lorain   we drank so long and hard   we raised ourselves above the broken places, mill fires burning red against the sky. Why   is there no end   to this unraveling.
***
I watch the woods for deer as if I’m armed. I watch the woods for deer who never come.  I know the hes and shes in autumn rendezvous in orchards stained with fallen  apples’ scent. I drive my car this way to work  so I may let the crows in corn believe it’s me their caws are meant to warn, and snakes who turn in warm and secret caves they know me too. They know the boy who lives inside me still won’t go away. The deer are ghosts who slip between the light  through trees, so you may only hear the snap  of branches in the thicket beyond hope.  I watch the woods for deer, as if I’m armed.
***
With focus sharp as Flemish-painted face In film of varnish brightly fixedAnd through a polished hand-lens deeply seen, Sunday at noon through hyaline thin air Sees down the street,And in the camera of my eye depicts Row-houses and row-lives:Glass after glass, door after door the same, Face after face the same, the same,The brutal visibility the same;As if one life emerging from one house Would pause, a single image caught between Two facing mirrors where vision multipliesBeyond perspective,A silent clatter in the high-speed eye Spinning out photo-circulars of sight.I see slip to the curb the long machinesOut of whose warm and windowed rooms pirouette Shellacked with silk and lightThe hard legs of our women.Our women are one woman, dressed in black. The carmine printed mouthAnd cheeks as soft as muslin-glass belongOutright to one dark dressy man,Merely a swagger at her curvy side.This is their visit to themselves:All day from porch to porch they weaveA nonsense pattern through the even glare, Stealing in surfacesCold vulgar glances at themselves.And high up in the heated room all dayI wait behind the plate glass pane for one, Hot as a voyeur for a glimpse of one,The vision to blot out this woman’s sheen; All day my sight records expensively Row-houses and row-lives.But nothing happens; no diagonalWith melting shadow falls across the curb:Neither the blinded negress lurching through fatigue, Nor exiles bleeding from their pores,Nor that bright bomb slipped lightly from its rack To splinter every silvered glass and crystal prism,Witch-bowl and perfume bottleAnd billion candle-power dressing-bulb, No direct hit to smash the shatter-proof And lodge at last the quivering needleClean in the eye of one who stands transfixed In fascination of her brightness.
***
The bugle sounds the measured call to prayers,    The band starts bravely with a clarion hymn,    From every side, singly, in groups, in pairs,Each to his kind of service comes to worship Him.   Our faces washed, our hearts in the right place,    We kneel or stand or listen from our tents;    Half-naked natives with their kind of graceMove down the road with balanced staffs like mendicants.   And over the hill the guns bang like a door    And planes repeat their mission in the heights.    The jungle outmaneuvers creeping warAnd crawls within the circle of our sacred rites.   I long for our disheveled Sundays home,    Breakfast, the comics, news of latest crimes,    Talk without reference, and palindromes,Sleep and the Philharmonic and the ponderous Times.   I long for lounging in the afternoons   Of clean intelligent warmth, my brother’s mind,    Books and thin plates and flowers and shining spoons,And your love’s presence, snowy, beautiful, and kind.
***
When visiting a distant (and imponderable) shire, one longs to hear the cry “Hygrometer!Fresh hygrometer for sale!” Yes, and when the fair sex sidles close and coyly murmurs “nitrogen”into a burly masculine ear, I guarantee you: the translation is very easy. The allurements of a local siren,whispering the kind of patois a traveler like Lord Byron favors, never fail to comfort, and to reassure,evoking pleasant memories of one’s own beloved hygrometer at home, kept fresh in Cosmoline and camphorand awaiting one’s rearrival back in his native xenon and nitrogen. Without these occasional reminiscences, any translationfrom nation to nation, tongue to tongue, becomes a translation difficult to sustain. I think of my grandmother: “We're not hirin’ today” “Go away” “Dumb Jew”—her shareof the language that greeted her here in the land of alien hygrometer and freedom, where she was only one more funny-skirted for-eigner yearning to hear a lulling Hungarian nitrogenhum her to sleep. Eventually, of course, the American nitrogen sufficed. Her daughter could speak, in free translation,both uranium and argon; and her granddaughter gigs with Fire ’n Ice, a skinhead punk-grunge group that performs in sheerblack nighties and clown wigs—she plays mean electric hygrometer in the first set and then, for a twofer,(very American, that) plays paper-and-comb. Farout. She’s so fluent in various World Wide Webbery that nitrogen in a thousand different inflections is her birthright, and almost any translation, mind to mind, gender to gender, is second nature. “I earnmy keep, I party, I sleep” is her motto. Though she’s for-tunate in having a lover who’s CEO at Hygrometer,Potassium, Klein & Wong: it helps to pay the “hygrometer man” when he knocks at the door. I won’t say that they fear this guy exactly, but he’s a major badass nitrogen-sucking cyberwired ninja-kicking shitheel (or, translation:call him Sir). It makes one pine for a land where the birds all choir in sweetly trilling melodies on a flower-scented shore,and a translation sings all night. Row gen-tly toward it. The tender forests sigh, and the soft whirr of the hygrometer promises oxidation of iron.
***
O hideous little bat, the size of snot, With polyhedral eye and shabby clothes, To populate the stinking cat you walk The promontory of the dead man’s nose, Climb with the fine leg of a Duncan-Phyfe  The smoking mountains of my food     And in a comic mood   In mid-air take to bed a wife.Riding and riding with your filth of hair On gluey foot or wing, forever coy,Hot from the compost and green sweet decay, Sounding your buzzer like an urchin toyYou dot all whiteness with diminutive stool,  In the tight belly of the dead    Burrow with hungry head  And inlay maggots like a jewel.At your approach the great horse stomps and paws Bringing the hurricane of his heavy tail;Shod in disease you dare to kiss my handWhich sweeps against you like an angry flail; Still you return, return, trusting your wing   To draw you from the hunter’s reach    That learns to kill to teach  Disorder to the tinier thing.My peace is your disaster. For your death Children like spiders cup their pretty hands And wives resort to chemistry of war.In fens of sticky paper and quicksandsYou glue yourself to death. Where you are stuck   You struggle hideously and beg,    You amputate your leg  Imbedded in the amber muck.But I, a man, must swat you with my hate, Slap you across the air and crush your flight, Must mangle with my shoe and smear your blood, Expose your little guts pasty and white,Knock your head sidewise like a drunkard’s hat,   Pin your wings under like a crow’s,    Tear off your flimsy clothes  And beat you as one beats a rat.Then like Gargantua I stride amongThe corpses strewn like raisins in the dust, The broken bodies of the narrow deadThat catch the throat with fingers of disgust. I sweep. One gyrates like a top and falls  And stunned, stone blind, and deaf    Buzzes its frightful F  And dies between three cannibals.
***
The light has traveled unthinkable thousands of miles to be   condensed, recharged, and poured off the white white pages of an open Bible the country parson holds in front of this couple   in a field, in July, in the sap and the flyswirl of July in upper Wisconsin, where their vows buzz in a ring in the air like the flies, and are as sweet as the sap, in these rich and ritual minutes.   Is it sentimental? Oops. And out of that Bible the light continues   to rush as if from a faucet. There will be a piecrust cooling   out of its own few x’ed-out cuts. And will it make us run   for the picklier taste of irony rolled around protectively on our tongues   like a grab of Greek olives? My students and I discuss this   slippery phenomenon. Does “context” matter? Does “earned” count? If a balled-up fidget of snakes in the underbrush dies in a freeze is it sentimental? No,   yes, maybe. What if a litter of cocker spaniels? What if we called them “puppydogs” in the same poem in that same hard,   hammering winter? When my father was buried, the gray snow in the cemetery was sheet tin. If I said that? Yes, no, what does “tone” or “history” do to the Hollywood hack violinists who patiently wait to play   the taut nerves of the closest human body until from that   lush cue alone, the eyes swell moistly, and the griefs we warehouse daily take advantage of this thinning of our systems, then the first sloppy gushes begin . . . Is that “wrong”? Did I tell you the breaths of the gravediggers puffed out like factorysmoke as they bent and straightened, bent and straightened, mechanically? Are wise old (toothless) Black blues singers   sentimental?—“gran’ma”? “country cookin’”? But they have their validity, don't they, yes? their sweat-in-the-creases, picking up the lighting in a fine-lined mesh of what it means to have gone through time   alive a little bit on this planet. Hands shoot up . . . opinions . . . questions . . . What if the sun wept? the moon? Why, in the face of those open faces, are we so squeamish? Call out the crippled girl and her only friend the up-for-sale foal,   and let her tootle her woeful pennywhistle musics. What if some chichi streetwise junkass from the demimonde gave forth with the story of orphans forced through howling storm   to the workhouse, letting it swing between the icy-blue   quotation marks of cynicism—then? What if   I wept? What if I simply put the page down,   rocked my head in my own folded elbows, forgot   the rest of it all, and wept? What if I stepped into   the light of that page, a burnished and uncompromising   light, and walked back up to his stone a final time,   just that, no drama, and it was so cold, and the air was so brittle, metal buckled out song like a bandsaw, and there, from inside me,   where they’d been lost in shame and sophistry all these years now, every last one of my childhood’s   heartwormed puppydogs found its natural voice. 
***
It stops the town we come through. Workers raise Their oily arms in good salute and grin. Kids scream as at a circus. Business men Glance hopefully and go their measured way. And women standing at their dumbstruck door More slowly wave and seem to warn us back, As if a tear blinding the course of warMight once dissolve our iron in their sweet wish.Fruit of the world, O clustered on ourselves We hang as from a cornucopiaIn total friendliness, with faces bunchedTo spray the streets with catcalls and with leers. A bottle smashes on the moving tiesAnd eyes fixed on a lady smiling pinkStretch like a rubber-band and snap and sting The mouth that wants the drink-of-water kiss.And on through crummy continents and days, Deliberate, grimy, slightly drunk we crawl,The good-bad boys of circumstance and chance, Whose bucket-helmets bang the empty wall Where twist the murdered bodies of our packs Next to the guns that only seem themselves. And distance like a strap adjusted shrinks, Tightens across the shoulder and holds firm.Here is a deck of cards; out of this hand Dealer, deal me my luck, a pair of bulls,The right draw to a flush, the one-eyed jack. Diamonds and hearts are red but spades are black, And spades are spades and clubs are cloversblack. But deal me winners, souvenirs of peace. This stands to reason and arithmetic, Luck also travels and not all come back.Trains lead to ships and ships to death or trains, And trains to death or trucks, and trucks to death, Or trucks lead to the march, the march to death, Or that survival which is all our hope;And death leads back to trucks and trains and ships, But life leads to the march, O flag! at last The place of life found after trains and deathNightfall of nations brilliant after war.
***
Mail-day, and over the world in a thousand drag-nets     The bundles of letters are dumped on the docks and beaches,    And all that is dear to the personal conscious reaches Around us again like filings around iron magnets, And war stands aside for an hour and looks at our faces Of total absorption that seem to have lost their places.O demobilized for a moment, a world is made human,     Returns to a time that is neither the present or then,     But a garland of clippings and wishes of who-knows-when,A time of its own creation, a thing of acumenThat keeps us, like movies, alive with a purpose, aside From the play-acting truth of the newsreel in which we have died.And aside from the candy and pictures and books we receive,    As if we were patients whose speedy recovery were certain,    There is proof of the End and the lights and the bow at the curtain,After which we shall smile at each other and get up to leave.Aside from the play in the play there is all that is fact,These letters, the battle in progress, the place of the act.And the optimal joy of the conflict, the tears of the ads     May move us or not, and the movies at night in the palms    May recall us or not to the kiss, and on Sunday the psalmsMay remind us of Sunday or not, but aside from the lads Who arrive like our letters still fresh from the kiss and the tear,There are mouths that are dusty and eyes that are wider than fear.Say no more of the dead than a prayer, say no more of the land    Where the body is laid in the coral than that it is far;     Take your finger away from the map of wherever-we-are,For we lie in the map of the chart of your elderly hand; Do not hasten the future; in agony too there is timeFor the growth of the rose of the spirit astir in the slime.For aside from ourselves as we are there is nothing alive     Except as it keeps us alive, not tomorrow but now,     Our mail-day, today of the blood of the sweat of our brow,The year of our war to the end. When and where we arriveIs no matter, but how is the question we urgently need, How to love and to hate, how to die, how to write and to read.
***
The man behind the book may not be man, His own man or the book’s or yet the time’s, But still be whole, deciding what he can In praise of politics or German rimes;But the intellectual lights a cigaretteAnd offers it lit to the lady, whose odd smile Is the merest hyphenlest he should forget What he has been resuming all the while.He talks to overhear, she to withdrawTo some interior feminine firesideWhere the back arches, beauty puts forth a paw Like a black puma stretching in velvet pride,Making him think of cats, a stray of which Some days sets up a howling in his brain, Pure interference such as this neat bitch Seems to create from listening disdain.But talk is all the value, the release,Talk is the very fillip of an act,The frame and subject of the masterpiece Under whose film of age the face is cracked.His own forehead glows like expensive wood, But back of it the mind is disengaged,Self-sealing clock recording bad and good At constant temperature, intact, unaged.But strange, his body is an open house Inviting every passerby to stay;The city to and fro beneath his browsWanders and drinks and chats from night to day.Think of a private thought, indecent room Where one might kiss his daughter before bed! Life is embarrassed; shut the family tomb, Console your neighbor for his recent dead;Do something! die in Spain or paint a green Gouache, go into business (Rimbaud did), Or start another Little Magazine,Or move in with a woman, have a kid.Invulnerable, impossible, immune,Do what you will, your will will not be done But dissipate the light of afternoonTill evening flickers like the midnight sun,And midnight shouts and dies: I’d rather be A milkman walking in his sleep at dawn Bearing fat quarts of cream, and so be free, Crossing alone and cold from lawn to lawn.I’d rather be a barber and cut hairThan walk with you in gilt museum halls, You and the puma-lady, she so rare Exhaling her silk soul upon the walls.Go take yourselves apart, but let me be The fault you find with everyman. I spit, I laugh, I fight; and you, l’homme qui rît;Swallow your stale saliva, and still sit.
***
The gates clanged and they walked you into jail More tense than felons but relieved to findThe hostile world shut out, the flags that dripped From every mother’s windowpane, obscene The bloodlust sweating from the public heart, The dog authority slavering at your throat. A sense of quiet, of pulling down the blind Possessed you. Punishment you felt was clean.The decks, the catwalks, and the narrow light Composed a ship. This was a mutinous crew Troubling the captains for plain decencies, A Mayflower brim with pilgrims headed out To establish new theocracies to west,A Noah’s ark coasting the topmost seas Ten miles above the sodomites and fish. These inmates loved the only living doves.Like all men hunted from the world you made A good community, voyaging the storm To no safe Plymouth or green Ararat;Trouble or calm, the men with Bibles prayed, The gaunt politicals construed our hate. The opposite of all armies, you were best Opposing uniformity and yourselves;Prison and personality were your fate.You suffered not so physically but knew Maltreatment, hunger, ennui of the mind. Well might the soldier kissing the hot beach Erupting in his face damn all your kind. Yet you who saved neither yourselves nor us Are equally with those who shed the blood The heroes of our cause. Your conscience is What we come back to in the armistice.
***
I am an atheist who says his prayers.I am an anarchist, and a full professor at that. I take the loyalty oath.I am a deviate. I fondle and contribute, backscuttle and brown, father of three.I stand high in the community. My name is in Who’s Who. People argue about my modesty.I drink my share and yours and never have enough. I free-load officially and unofficially.A physical coward, I take on all intellectuals, established poets, popes, rabbis, chiefs of staff.I am a mystic. I will take an oath that I have seen the Virgin. Under the dry pandanus, to the scratching of kangaroo rats, I achieve psychic onanism. My tree of nerves electrocutes itself.I uphold the image of America and force my luck. I write my own ticket to oblivion.I am of the race wrecked by success. The audience brings me news of my death. I write out of boredom, despise solemnity. The wrong reason is good enough for me.I am of the race of the prematurely desperate. In poverty of comfort I lay gunpowder plots. I lapse my insurance.I am the Babbitt metal of the future. I never read more than half of a book. But that half I read forever.I love the palimpsest, statues without heads, fertility dolls of the continent of Mu. I dream prehistory, the invention of dye. The palms of the dancers’ hands are vermillion. Their heads oscillate like the cobra. High-caste woman smelling of earth and silk, you can dry my feet with your hair.I take my place beside the Philistine and unfold my napkin. This afternoon I defend the Marines. I goggle at long cars.Without compassion I attack the insane. Give them the horsewhip!The homosexual lectures me brilliantly in the beer booth. I can feel my muscles soften. He smiles at my terror.Pitchpots flicker in the lemon groves. I gaze down on the plains of Hollywood. My fine tan and my arrogance, my gray hair and my sneakers, O Israel!Wherever I am I become. The power of entry is with me. In the doctor’s office a patient, calm and humiliated. In the foreign movies a native, shabby enough. In the art gallery a person of authority (there’s a secret way of approaching a picture. Others move off). The high official insults me to my face. I say nothing and accept the job. He offers me whiskey.How beautifully I fake! I convince myself with men’s room jokes and epigrams. I paint myself into a corner and escape on pulleys of the unknown. Whatever I think at the moment is true. Turn me around in my tracks; I will take your side.For the rest, I improvise and am not spiteful and water the plants on the cocktail table.
***
Fire isn’t allowed, for the sake of the books.The lean monk-copyist who scribes the books is slate-blue at his fingertipsthis steely late-November day in the year 1000. Brother Ambrosio huffs some perfunctory warmth on his stiffening hands, then bends again to his goat’s-horn of ink. For every line, he believes, he’s forgiven a sin. And now he’s at his heavy uncial letters, and will be for nine hours more,until a slab of bread and a beet relieve his transcriptual ardor. What he copies?—psalter, missal, hagiography:the predetermined and sanctioned community passions of a religious culture. Nothing like the twentieth century’s prevalent kneejerk “self-expression.” Nothing like the priest,excuse me: former priest, and former nun, on daytime talk TV, who live, she tells us, in a “trinity of love” with the former creator-of-tourist-ashtrays-out-of-catfish-heads. This is, she insists, the final and jubilant stage of a lifelong “quest to feel belongingness” initiated thirty years before by parents skittering cross-country with the military: they were wholly rootless, and so she grew up “unable to commit.” The following day, a man confesses to pedophilia because of a lesbian aunt. A woman says she robbed the Sack-N-Save of $13.42 “because of what they’re dumping in the water supply, it makes me go all freaky.” Steve was bounced out from The Chicken Shack “because I’m Scandinavian.” The cultureof blame is so completely exterior in its search for cause, some days I wake to think I’ll find most people laboringunder the weight of sci-fi-style mind parasites, like fleshy turbans spewing in, and feeding off, their brain blood. This (by “this”I mean of course a recognition of the magic of objective correlative boppin’ about in the spotlight) is, to some length, understandable: you can’t beat the miniscule carry-along convenience of a silicon chip invisibly set in something, BUT for sheer persuasive visual power, that can’t touch a 1940s generating plant, its giant Alcatrazian shape against the sky, and the enormous wrestling electrical crackles snaking its rooftop pylon. In the scriptorium, even—such an isolated unit of human endeavor, its limited range of reactions surely is pure—when Brother Ambrosio nods off, sleepy in his long day’s long eighth hour of thickly nibbed and careful letters, he knowsit’s imps in league with Satan that keep pulling down his eyelids. If in scratching his flea-measled thigh he spills a hand’s-expanse of ink across the vellum page, the fleas are tiny devils on a guerilla mission from Hell. And once a devilkin took lodging in his belly, and there created “rumbling noises like a toad, and which, for hours, spoiled the concentration of all of the other Brothers.” We find parchment scraps with appropriate exorcisms:“Away! you flaming sow, you poisoned udder,you arse of the arch-fiend, shit-fly, stinking he-goat, out out out, away, back into thine infernal kitchen,you bestial puke!” We also findthose charming marginal doodles (sprigs in flower, unicorns, seemingly every songbird in Creation): such diminutive external bodies given to the longings of these cooped-up men. And when they came to drag my friend Jess screaming to the ward, because he was beating his head on the lawyer’s steps, it was clear to us all that the chemicals in his mind had turned against him. It was clear to Jessthat he was being hunted like prey by hounds from the moon.
***
As a sloop with a sweep of immaculate wing on her delicate spineAnd a keel as steel as a root that holds in the sea as she leans,Leaning and laughing, my warm-hearted beauty, you ride, you ride,You tack on the curves with parabola speed and a kiss of goodbye,Like a thoroughbred sloop, my new high-spirited spirit, my kiss.As my foot suggests that you leap in the air with your hips of a girl,My finger that praises your wheel and announces your voices of song,Flouncing your skirts, you blueness of joy, you flirt of politeness,You leap, you intelligence, essence of wheelness with silvery nose,And your platinum clocks of excitement stir like the hairs of a fern.But how alien you are from the booming belts of your birth and the smokeWhere you turned on the stinging lathes of Detroit and Lansing at nightAnd shrieked at the torch in your secret parts and the amorous tests,But now with your eyes that enter the future of roads you forget;You are all instinct with your phosphorous glow and your streaking hair.And now when we stop it is not as the bird from the shell that I leaveOr the leathery pilot who steps from his bird with a sneer of delight,And not as the ignorant beast do you squat and watch me depart,But with exquisite breathing you smile, with satisfaction of love,And I touch you again as you tick in the silence and settle in sleep.
***
Each morning he’d anoint the room’s four corners with an arc of piss, and then—until he was forcibly halted—beat his forehead openon the eastern wall, the “sunrise wall,” incanting a doggerel prayer about Godthe Flower, God of the Hot Plucked Heart; andshe, if loose in the halls, would join him,squatting in the center of the room and masturbating with a stolen bar of soap. This isn’t why they were sent to the madhouse: this is what they needed to do once in the madhouse: this is the only meaningful ritual they could fashion there, created from the few, make-do materials available. It isn’t wondrous strange more than the mega-boozhwah formulaic splendor of my sister’s wedding ten, eleven years ago: her opulent bouquet of plastic flowers (for the wilting pour of wattage at the photo session), nigglingly arranged to match the real bouquet she carried down the aisle, bloom per bloom; the five-foot Taj Mahal of sculpted pastel sherbet; endless “Fiddler on the Roof”; I’m sorry now I cranked my academic sneer hauteur in place all night. I’m sorry I didn’t lose myself like a drunken bee in a room-sized rose, in waltzing Auntie Sally to the lush swell of the band. We need this thing. There’s not one mineral in Stonehenge that our blood can’t also raise. One dusk, one vividly contusion-color dusk, with my fists in my pockets and a puzzle of fish-rib clouds in the sky, I stopped at the low-level glow of a basement window (Hot Good Noodle Shop) and furtively looked in:a full-grown pig was splayed on the table,stunned but fitfully twitching, it looked as ifit had grasshoppers under its skin. A man and a woman slit that body jaw-to-ass with an ornate knife, and then they both scooped out a tumble of many dozens of wasps, preservedby the oils of living pig to a beautiful black and amber gem-like sheen. I saw it. Did Isee it? From inside this, over their wrists in the tripes, they carefully removedthe wooden doll of a man and the wooden doll of a woman maybe two inches tall, a tiny lacquered sun and matching brass coin of a moon, and then a child’s-third-grade-version of a house made out of pallid wax: a square of walls, a pyramid roof, and a real smoking chimney.
***
Traveling through the dark I found a deer dead on the edge of the Wilson River road. It is usually best to roll them into the canyon: that road is narrow; to swerve might make more dead. By glow of the tail-light I stumbled back of the car   and stood by the heap, a doe, a recent killing;   she had stiffened already, almost cold. I dragged her off; she was large in the belly. My fingers touching her side brought me the reason— her side was warm; her fawn lay there waiting,   alive, still, never to be born. Beside that mountain road I hesitated. The car aimed ahead its lowered parking lights;   under the hood purred the steady engine. I stood in the glare of the warm exhaust turning red;   around our group I could hear the wilderness listen. I thought hard for us all—my only swerving—,   then pushed her over the edge into the river.
***
There might be a planet. Before that, though, there would have been a gas that coalesced  into a planet . . . as, before that, there were dots of flux  and energy that hadn’t yet declared themselves in concert. There’s always “before”: there's more each minute, more each person, yes and every one of its smallest, irreducible subparticles—which I name  the “beforeon”—is exerting force on us that’s surely time’s own version of gravity: its purpose is to tug, and to remind us. In the house of second marriages, it causes the man to do what he and the woman had promised  they never would: one night while she’s asleep, he snoops  her bureau for telltale relics of the mysterious Mr.  Number One. And why, or even what he hopes to find, he couldn’t clearly say: a letter? photo?  sex toy?—something, some objectified gossip, a fossil  of bygone love. Essentially, we make of our own psyches  a bureau and pay a shrink to snoop; as for the moment  when our neural linkage first began to form, as for the flavor of the fluids in the womb. . . we’re all amnesiacs: and our earliest self, just like the universe’s  earliest being, is a “phantom limb” with the faintest  mnemonic of starbursts in an otherwise chill void. I have  a friend D____ L____ (this poem is hers) who, orphaned  as a newborn, is devoted to learning her origin as doggedly as any cosmologist tracks light to its source, although  her search (when not pure Internet) is more a matter of tape-recording the beer-sour stories in sailor bars, of sifting ashy memories in nursing homes, one backwards inch of plotline at a time. And yet somebody else is waking up this morning with the need  to be detached from any history, to stand here like a person in a play who enters  onstage from a pool of perfect blankness. Then, of course, he can start over, minute-zero-of-year-zero,  unbesmirched. We could have told him that he’d be this  anguished—sneaking in her drawer, below those folded  pastel lozenges of lingerie, uncovering the one thing  that could ruin them. Now he wants only to float (who  doesn't, sometimes?) in an anti-world: appealing, but illusory. We can’t unmoor ourselves from linearity,  no more than any one of us can be a human being  unconnected to a genome—and in fact, no more  than Mama-All-of-Time-and-Space-Herself (I mean  the cosmos) can unwrap her vasty body from its own  twelve million years of Big Bang “background radiation”  so it wafts—a tossed off, filmy scarf—far elsewhere.  No; there isn’t any “elsewhere.” When we sleep  or simply deepen into quietude enough, the voices  come—the rhythmic, grave, ancestral murmur, a woman bearing a ritual clamshell bowl . . . a man with a done-deal sales contract . . . whispers, knuckle-rap, cleared throats. . . . Her great-grandfather,  D____ L____ has uncovered, was a lector—a reader they used  to relieve the tedium of the leaf rollers’ shifts  in cigar manufactories. Shakespeare, Dickens,  union tracts, love letters, family diaries . . . . He’s  walking through the tobacco aroma; he’s setting his text  on his easel; and the story—the only story we know,  the story of Before—is recited. 
***
At noon in the desert a panting lizard   waited for history, its elbows tense,   watching the curve of a particular road   as if something might happen. It was looking at something farther off   than people could see, an important scene   acted in stone for little selves at the flute end of consequences. There was just a continent without much on it   under a sky that never cared less.   Ready for a change, the elbows waited.   The hands gripped hard on the desert.
***
The renewal project is doomed: because its funding board’s vice-president resigned: because  the acids of divorce were eating day-long  at her stomach, at her thoughts: because her husband was neglecting her, in favor of his daughter, who was dying: because her husband, bi and edgy, bore an AIDS sore that was ripe  enough with fear and woe to throw this whole  thick network of connections off its balance and down a hole of human misery. Haven’t we seen it happen?  —when a crowded room at a party was tilted  perilously askew by the weight of two  wept tears that weren’t as large as a housefly’s wings,  that couldn’t have filled a pistachio shell. _________ It’s like this: because because because, Sawyer was drunk when he delivered his opening remarks  onstage at Stardome Planetarium. He stood below a slide show of “The Emptiness of Outer Space”  —stars and planets, scattered like the scantest motes of dust in unimaginable void—and was about  to make the leap to what percent of us, our dearly thumping bodies, is a corresponding emptiness . . .  when one foot met a wire that had strayed outside the curtain, and a wild arc of hand undid the podium, which canted off its casters sidelong into the 3-D galaxy props, and you could say whatever  thimble or pustule or hackle of grief was his, it had toppled the whole damn universe. _________ Was she a ghost? Sometimes she thought she was a ghost, transparent, stealing through the lives of people  untouched and untouching. And so she carried a bucket  of burning coals (we’ll call it that for now) against  her breasts; and then she knew she was alive. And  he. . . ?—was just the rusty foxing that an antique book  exhales into dim air, wasn’t that what he was,  oh it was, yes it was, and so one afternoon he strapped  a meteorite to his back, and now he walks the streets  like anybody else. An ageless tribal saying:  If you aren’t given a burden, you must carve own.  ***
Sometimes up out of this land   a legend begins to move. Is it a coming near of something under love? Love is of the earth only,   the surface, a map of roads   leading wherever go miles   or little bushes nod. Not so the legend under,   fixed, inexorable, deep as the darkest mine   the thick rocks won't tell. As fire burns the leaf and out of the green appears   the vein in the center line and the legend veins under there, So, the world happens twice— once what we see it as; second it legends itself deep, the way it is.
***
Mine was a Midwest home—you can keep your world.   Plain black hats rode the thoughts that made our code.   We sang hymns in the house; the roof was near God. The light bulb that hung in the pantry made a wan light,   but we could read by it the names of preserves— outside, the buffalo grass, and the wind in the night. A wildcat sprang at Grandpa on the Fourth of July   when he was cutting plum bushes for fuel, before Indians pulled the West over the edge of the sky. To anyone who looked at us we said, “My friend”;   liking the cut of a thought, we could say “Hello.” (But plain black hats rode the thoughts that made our code.) The sun was over our town; it was like a blade.   Kicking cottonwood leaves we ran toward storms.   Wherever we looked the land would hold us up.
***
When we first moved here, pulled   the trees in around us, curled   our backs to the wind, no one   had ever hit the moon—no one. Now our trees are safer than the stars,   and only other people's neglect   is our precious and abiding shell, pierced by meteors, radar, and the telephone. From our snug place we shout religiously for attention, in order to hide:   only silence or evasion will bring dangerous notice, the hovering hawk of the state, or the sudden quiet stare   and fatal estimate of an alerted neighbor. This message we smuggle out in   its plain cover, to be opened   quietly: Friends everywhere— we are alive! Those moon rockets   have missed millions of secret   places! Best wishes. Burn this.
***
Setting a trotline after sundown if we went far enough away in the night   sometimes up out of deep water would come a secret-headed channel cat, Eyes that were still eyes in the rush of darkness,   flowing feelers noncommittal and black, and hidden in the fins those rasping bone daggers,   with one spiking upward on its back. We would come at daylight and find the line sag,   the fishbelly gleam and the rush on the tether:   to feel the swerve and the deep current which tugged at the tree roots below the river.
***
Anyone with quiet pace who walks a gray road in the West may hear a badger underground where   in deep flint another time is Caught by flint and held forever,   the quiet pace of God stopped still.   Anyone who listens walks on   time that dogs him single file, To mountains that are far from people,   the face of the land gone gray like flint.   Badgers dig their little lives there,   quiet-paced the land lies gaunt, The railroad dies by a yellow depot,   town falls away toward a muddy creek.   Badger-gray the sod goes under a river of wind, a hawk on a stick.
***
All the Sioux were defeated. Our clan   got poor, but a few got richer. They fought two wars. I did not take part. No one remembers your vision   or even your real name. Now   the children go to town and like   loud music. I married a Christian. Crazy Horse, it is not fair to hide a new vision from you. In our schools we are learning to take aim when we talk, and we have   found out our enemies. They shift when   words do; they even change and hide   in every person. A teacher here says   hurt or scorned people are places   where real enemies hide. He says   we should not hurt or scorn anyone,   but help them. And I will tell you   in a brave way, the way Crazy Horse   talked: that teacher is right. I will tell you a strange thing: at the rodeo, close to the grandstand,   I saw a farm lady scared by a blown   piece of paper; and at that place   horses and policemen were no longer   frightening, but suffering faces were,   and the hunched-over backs of the old. Crazy Horse, tell me if I am right: these are the things we thought we were   doing something about. In your life you saw many strange things,   and I will tell you another: now I salute   the white man’s flag. But when I salute   I hold my hand alertly on the heartbeat   and remember all of us and how we depend   on a steady pulse together. There are those   who salute because they fear other flags   or mean to use ours to chase them:   I must not allow my part of saluting   to mean this. All of our promises,   our generous sayings to each other, our   honorable intentions—those I affirm   when I salute. At these times it is like   shutting my eyes and joining a religious colony at prayer in the gray dawn   in the deep aisles of a church. Now I have told you about new times.   Yes, I know others will report different things. They have been caught   by weak ways. I tell you straight the way it is now, and it is our way,   the way we were trying to find. The chokecherries along our valley still bear a bright fruit. There is good pottery clay north of here. I remember our old places. When I pass the Musselshell I run my hand along those old grooves in the rock.
***
Whispering to each handhold, “I'll be back,”   I go up the cliff in the dark. One place   I loosen a rock and listen a long time till it hits, faint in the gulf, but the rush of the torrent almost drowns it out, and the wind— I almost forgot the wind: it tears at your side   or it waits and then buffets; you sag outward. . . . I remember they said it would be hard. I scramble   by luck into a little pocket out of the wind and begin to beat on the stones with my scratched numb hands, rocking back and forth in silent laughter there in the dark— “Made it again!” Oh how I love this climb! —the whispering to stones, the drag, the weight   as your muscles crack and ease on, working   right. They are back there, discontent, waiting to be driven forth. I pound on the earth, riding the earth past the stars:   “Made it again! Made it again!”
***
Ours are the streets where Bess first met her   cancer. She went to work every day past the   secure houses. At her job in the library she arranged better and better flowers, and when   students asked for books her hand went out   to help. In the last year of her life she had to keep her friends from knowing   how happy they were. She listened while they complained about food or work or the weather.   And the great national events danced   their grotesque, fake importance. Always Pain moved where she moved. She walked   ahead; it came. She hid; it found her.   No one ever served another so truly;   no enemy ever meant so strong a hate.   It was almost as if there was no room   left for her on earth. But she remembered where joy used to live. She straightened its flowers;   she did not weep when she passed its houses;   and when finally she pulled into a tiny corner   and slipped from pain, her hand opened again, and the streets opened, and she wished all well.
***
Cold nights outside the taverns in Wyoming pickups and big semis lounge idling, letting their   haunches twitch now and then in gusts of powder snow,   their owners inside for hours, forgetting as well   as they can the miles, the circling plains, the still town   that connects to nothing but cold and space and a few   stray ribbons of pavement, icy guides to nothing   but bigger towns and other taverns that glitter and wait:   Denver, Cheyenne. Hibernating in the library of the school on the hill   a few pieces by Thomas Aquinas or Saint Teresa and the fragmentary explorations of people like Alfred   North Whitehead crouch and wait amid research folders   on energy and military recruitment posters glimpsed   by the hard stars. The school bus by the door, a yellow   mound, clangs open and shut as the wind finds a loose   door and worries it all night, letting the hollow   students count off and break up and blow away   over the frozen ground.
***
Aristotle was a little man with eyes like a lizard, and he found a streak down the midst of things, a smooth place for his feet  much more important than the carved handles  on the coffins of the great. He said you should put your hand out  at the time and place of need: strength matters little, he said, nor even speed. His pupil, a king's son, died at an early age. That Aristotle spoke of him  it is impossible to find—the youth was  notorious, a conqueror, a kid with a gang,  but even this Aristotle didn't ever say. Around the farthest forest and along  all the bed of the sea, Aristotle studied  immediate, local ways. Many of which  were wrong. So he studied poetry.  There, in pity and fear, he found Man. Many thinkers today, who stand low and grin,  have little use for anger or power, its palace  or its prison— but quite a bit for that little man with eyes like a lizard.
***
The green catalpa tree has turned All white; the cherry blooms once more.   In one whole year I haven’t learned   A blessed thing they pay you for.   The blossoms snow down in my hair;   The trees and I will soon be bare. The trees have more than I to spare.   The sleek, expensive girls I teach,   Younger and pinker every year,   Bloom gradually out of reach. The pear tree lets its petals drop   Like dandruff on a tabletop. The girls have grown so young by now   I have to nudge myself to stare. This year they smile and mind me how   My teeth are falling with my hair.   In thirty years I may not get Younger, shrewder, or out of debt. The tenth time, just a year ago,   I made myself a little list Of all the things I’d ought to know,   Then told my parents, analyst,   And everyone who’s trusted me   I’d be substantial, presently. I haven’t read one book about A book or memorized one plot.   Or found a mind I did not doubt. I learned one date. And then forgot.   And one by one the solid scholars   Get the degrees, the jobs, the dollars. And smile above their starchy collars. I taught my classes Whitehead’s notions;   One lovely girl, a song of Mahler’s.   Lacking a source-book or promotions,   I showed one child the colors of   A luna moth and how to love. I taught myself to name my name, To bark back, loosen love and crying;   To ease my woman so she came,   To ease an old man who was dying.   I have not learned how often I Can win, can love, but choose to die. I have not learned there is a lie Love shall be blonder, slimmer, younger;   That my equivocating eye Loves only by my body’s hunger; That I have forces, true to feel, Or that the lovely world is real. While scholars speak authority And wear their ulcers on their sleeves,   My eyes in spectacles shall see These trees procure and spend their leaves.   There is a value underneath The gold and silver in my teeth. Though trees turn bare and girls turn wives,   We shall afford our costly seasons; There is a gentleness survives That will outspeak and has its reasons.   There is a loveliness exists, Preserves us, not for specialists.
***
After experience taught me that all the ordinary   Surroundings of social life are futile and vain;          I’m going to show you something very            Ugly: someday, it might save your life. Seeing that none of the things I feared contain   In themselves anything either good or bad          What if you get caught without a knife;            Nothing—even a loop of piano wire; Excepting only in the effect they had   Upon my mind, I resolved to inquire          Take the first two fingers of this hand;          Fork them out—kind of a “V for Victory”— Whether there might be something whose discovery   Would grant me supreme, unending happiness.          And jam them into the eyes of your enemy.            You have to do this hard. Very hard. Then press No virtue can be thought to have priority   Over this endeavor to preserve one’s being.          Both fingers down around the cheekbone            And setting your foot high into the chest No man can desire to act rightly, to be blessed,   To live rightly, without simultaneously          You must call up every strength you own            And you can rip off the whole facial mask. Wishing to be, to act, to live. He must ask   First, in other words, to actually exist.                            And you, whiner, who wastes your time                               Dawdling over the remorseless earth,                              What evil, what unspeakable crime                               Have you made your life worth? 
***
Admire, when you come here, the glimmering hair  Of the girl; praise her pale Complexion. Think well of her dress  Though that is somewhat out of fashion.  Don’t try to take her hand, but smile for  Her hesitant gentleness. Say the old woman is looking strong  Today; such hardiness. Remark, Perhaps, how she has dressed herself black  Like a priest, and wears that sufficient air  That does become the righteous. As you approach, she will push back  Her chair, shove away her plate And wait, Sitting squat and direct, before The red mahogany chest Massive as some great Safe; will wait, By the table and her greasy plate, The bone half-chewed, her wine half-drained;  She will wait. And fix her steady Eyes on you—the straight stare Of an old politician. Try once to meet her eyes. But fail.  Let your sight Drift—yet never as if hunting for The keys (you keep imagining) hung  By her belt. (They are not there.) Watch, perhaps, that massive chest—the way  It tries to lean Forward, toward her, till it seems to rest  Its whole household’s weight Of linens and clothing and provisions  All on her stiff back. It might be strapped there like the monstrous pack  Of some enchanted pedlar. Dense, self-contained,  Like mercury in a ball, She can support this without strain,  Yet she grows smaller, wrinkling  Like a potato, parched as dung;  It cramps her like a fist. Ask no one why the chest Has no knobs. Betray No least suspicion The necessities within Could vanish at her Will. Try not to think That as she feeds, gains Specific gravity, She shrinks, light- less as the world’s Hard core And the per- spective drains In her. Finally, above all, You must not ever see, Or let slip one hint you can see,  On the other side, the girl’s Cuffs, like cordovan restraints; Forget her bony, tentative wrist, The half-fed, worrying eyes, and how  She backs out, bows, and tries to bow  Out of the scene, grows too ethereal  To make a shape inside her dress And the dress itself is beginning already  To sublime itself away like a vapor  That merges into the empty twinkling  Of the air and of the bright wallpaper.
***
The eyelids glowing, some chill morning. O world half-known through opening, twilit lids       Before the vague face clenches into light; O universal waters like a cloud,     Like those first clouds of half-created matter; O all things rising, rising like the fumes     From waters falling, O forever falling; Infinite, the skeletal shells that fall, relinquished,     The snowsoft sift of the diatoms, like selves   Downdrifting age upon age through milky oceans;     O slow downdrifting of the atoms; O island nebulae and O the nebulous islands     Wandering these mists like falsefires, which are true,   Bobbing like milkweed, like warm lanterns bobbing     Through the snowfilled windless air, blinking and passing   As we pass into the memory of women     Who are passing. Within those depths   What ravening? What devouring rage?     How shall our living know its ends of yielding?   These things have taken me as the mouth an orange—     That acrid sweet juice entering every cell;   And I am shared out. I become these things:     These lilies, if these things are water lilies   Which are dancers growing dim across no floor;     These mayflies; whirled dust orbiting in the sun; This blossoming diffused as rushlights; galactic vapors;     Fluorescence into which we pass and penetrate;   O soft as the thighs of women;     O radiance, into which I go on dying ...
***
Up the reputable walks of old established trees They stalk, children of the nouveaux riches; chimes Of the tall Clock Tower drench their heads in blessing:   “I don't wanna play at your house; I don't like you any more.” My house stands opposite, on the other hill, Among meadows, with the orchard fences down and falling;   Deer come almost to the door. You cannot see it, even in this clearest morning. White birds hang in the air between Over the garbage landfill and those homes thereto adjacent,   Hovering slowly, turning, settling down Like the flakes sifting imperceptibly onto the little town   In a waterball of glass. And yet, this morning, beyond this quiet scene, The floating birds, the backyards of the poor, Beyond the shopping plaza, the dead canal, the hillside lying tilted in the air, Tomorrow has broken out today: Riot in Algeria, in Cyprus, in Alabama; Aged in wrong, the empires are declining, And China gathers, soundlessly, like evidence. What shall I say to the young on such a morning?— Mind is the one salvation?—also grammar?— No; my little ones lean not toward revolt. They Are the Whites, the vaguely furiously driven, who resist   Their souls with such passivity As would make Quakers swear. All day, dear Lord, all day   They wear their godhead lightly. They look out from their hill and say, To themselves, “We have nowhere to go but down;   The great destination is to stay.” Surely the nations will be reasonable; They look at the world—don't they?—the world's way?   The clock just now has nothing more to say.
***
1 Child of my winter, born When the new fallen soldiers froze In Asia’s steep ravines and fouled the snows,   When I was torn By love I could not still, By fear that silenced my cramped mind To that cold war where, lost, I could not find   My peace in my will, All those days we could keep Your mind a landscape of new snow Where the chilled tenant-farmer finds, below,   His fields asleep In their smooth covering, white As quilts to warm the resting bed Of birth or pain, spotless as paper spread   For me to write, And thinks: Here lies my land Unmarked by agony, the lean foot Of the weasel tracking, the thick trapper’s boot;   And I have planned My chances to restrain The torments of demented summer or   Increase the deepening harvest here before   It snows again. 2     Late April and you are three; today          We dug your garden in the yard.     To curb the damage of your play, Strange dogs at night and the moles tunneling,       Four slender sticks of lath stand guard            Uplifting their thin string.     So you were the first to tramp it down.          And after the earth was sifted close       You brought your watering can to drown All earth and us. But these mixed seeds are pressed       With light loam in their steadfast rows.          Child, we’ve done our best.     Someone will have to weed and spread          The young sprouts. Sprinkle them in the hour       When shadow falls across their bed. You should try to look at them every day       Because when they come to full flower          I will be away. 3 The child between them on the street   Comes to a puddle, lifts his feet     And hangs on their hands. They start   At the live weight and lurch together,   Recoil to swing him through the weather,     Stiffen and pull apart. We read of cold war soldiers that Never gained ground, gave none, but sat       Tight in their chill trenches. Pain seeps up from some cavity Through the ranked teeth in sympathy;       The whole jaw grinds and clenches Till something somewhere has to give.   It’s better the poor soldiers live     In someone else’s hands Than drop where helpless powers fall   On crops and barns, on towns where all       Will burn. And no man stands. For good, they sever and divide Their won and lost land. On each side       Prisoners are returned Excepting a few unknown names.   The peasant plods back and reclaims       His fields that strangers burned And nobody seems very pleased. It’s best. Still, what must not be seized       Clenches the empty fist. I tugged your hand, once, when I hated   Things less: a mere game dislocated       The radius of your wrist. Love’s wishbone, child, although I’ve gone   As men must and let you be drawn       Off to appease another, It may help that a Chinese play Or Solomon himself might say     I am your real mother. 4          No one can tell you why       the season will not wait;          the night I told you I must leave, you wept a fearful rate                to stay up late.          Now that it’s turning Fall,       we go to take our walk          among municipal flowers, to steal one off its stalk,                to try and talk.          We huff like windy giants     scattering with our breath            gray-headed dandelions; Spring is the cold wind's aftermath.              The poet saith.          But the asters, too, are gray,     ghost-gray. Last night’s cold            is sending on their way petunias and dwarf marigold,              hunched sick and old.          Like nerves caught in a graph,       the morning-glory vines          frost has erased by half still scrawl across their rigid twines.                Like broken lines          of verses I can’t make.     In its unraveling loom          we find a flower to take, with some late buds that might still bloom,                back to your room.          Night comes and the stiff dew.       I’m told a friend’s child cried            because a cricket, who had minstreled every night outside                her window, died. 5 Winter again and it is snowing;   Although you are still three,   You are already growing Strange to me. You chatter about new playmates, sing   Strange songs; you do not know   Hey ding-a-ding-a-ding ***
Sorting out letters and piles of my old     Canceled checks, old clippings, and yellow note cards   That meant something once, I happened to find     Your picture. That picture. I stopped there cold,   Like a man raking piles of dead leaves in his yard              Who has turned up a severed hand. Still, that first second, I was glad: you stand     Just as you stood—shy, delicate, slender, In that long gown of green lace netting and daisies     That you wore to our first dance. The sight of you stunned   Us all. Well, our needs were different, then,              And our ideals came easy. Then through the war and those two long years     Overseas, the Japanese dead in their shacks   Among dishes, dolls, and lost shoes; I carried     This glimpse of you, there, to choke down my fear,   Prove it had been, that it might come back.              That was before we got married. —Before we drained out one another’s force       With lies, self-denial, unspoken regret And the sick eyes that blame; before the divorce     And the treachery. Say it: before we met. Still,   I put back your picture. Someday, in due course,              I will find that it’s still there.
***
As we drove back, crossing the hill, The house still Hidden in the trees, I always thought— A fool’s fear—that it might have caught   Fire, someone could have broken in.   As if things must have been Too good here. Still, we always found   It locked tight, safe and sound. I mentioned that, once, as a joke;   No doubt we spoke Of the absurdity To fear some dour god’s jealousy   Of our good fortune. From the farm   Next door, our neighbors saw no harm   Came to the things we cared for here.   What did we have to fear? Maybe I should have thought: all Such things rot, fall— Barns, houses, furniture. We two are stronger than we were Apart; we’ve grown Together. Everything we own Can burn; we know what counts—some such   Idea. We said as much. We’d watched friends driven to betray;   Felt that love drained away Some self they need. We’d said love, like a growth, can feed   On hate we turn in and disguise; We warned ourselves. That you might despise   Me—hate all we both loved best— None of us ever guessed. The house still stands, locked, as it stood   Untouched a good Two years after you went. Some things passed in the settlement;   Some things slipped away. Enough’s left   That I come back sometimes. The theft   And vandalism were our own. Maybe we should have known.
***
Is it, then, your opinion                       Women are putty in your hands?                    Is this the face to launch upon                        A thousand one night stands? First, please, would you be so kind     As to define your contribution  To modern verse, the Western mind     And human institutions?                                     Where, where is the long, flowing hair,                                          The velvet suit, the broad bow tie;                                      Where is the other-worldly air,                                         Where the abstracted eye? Describe the influence on your verse     Of Oscar Mudwarp’s mighty line,  The theories of Susan Schmersch     Or the spondee’s decline.          You’ve labored to present us with              This mouse-sized volume; shall this equal           The epic glories of Joe Smith?              He’s just brought out a sequel.                   Where are the beard, the bongo drums,                       Tattered T-shirt and grubby sandals,                    As who, released from Iowa, comes                       To tell of wondrous scandals? Have you subversive, out of date,      Or controversial ideas? And can you really pull your weight      Among such minds as these?                                     Ah, what avails the tenure race,                                          Ah, what the Ph.D.,                                     When all departments have a place                                          For nincompoops like thee?
***
This is the needle that we give Soldiers and children when they live   Near the front in primitive     Conditions or real dangers; This is the spoon we use to feed   Men trapped in trouble or in need,   When weakness or bad luck might lead     Them to the hands of strangers. This is the room where you can sleep   Your sleep out, curled up under deep   Layers of covering that will keep     You safe till all harm’s past. This is the bed where you can rest   In perfect silence, undistressed By noise or nightmares, as my breast       Once held you soft but fast. This is the Doctor who has brought   Your needle with your special shot   To quiet you; you won’t get caught     Off guard or unprepared. I am your nurse who’ll comfort you;   I nursed you, fed you till you grew   Too big to feed; now you’re all through     Fretting or feeling scared. This is the glass tube that contains Calm that will spread down through your veins   To free you finally from all pains     Of going on in error. This tiny pinprick sets the germ Inside you that fills out its term Till you can feel yourself grow firm     Against all doubt, all terror. Into this spoon I break the pill   That stiffens the unsteady will   And hardens you against the chill     Voice of a world of lies. This amber medicine implants   Steadfastness in your blood; this grants   Immunity from greed and chance,     And from all compromise. This is the serum that can cure Weak hearts; these pure, clear drops insure   You’ll face what comes and can endure       The test; you’ll never falter. This is the potion that preserves You in a faith that never swerves; This sets the pattern of your nerves     Too firm for you to alter. I set this spoon between your tight   Teeth, as I gave you your first bite;   This satisfies your appetite     For other nourishment. Take this on your tongue; this do   Remembering your mother who So loved her Leader she stayed true     When all the others went, When every friend proved false, in the   Delirium of treachery On every hand, when even He     Had turned His face aside. He shut himself in with His whore; Then, though I screamed outside His door,   Said He’d not see me anymore.     They both took cyanide. Open wide, now, little bird; I who sang you your first word Soothe away every sound you’ve heard       Except your Leader’s voice. Close your eyes, now; take your death.   Once we slapped you to take breath.   Vengeance is mine, the Lord God saith     And cancels each last choice. Once, my first words marked out your mind;   Just as our Leader’s phrases bind All hearts to Him, building a blind     Loyalty through the nation, We shape you into a pure form. Trapped, our best soldiers tricked the storm,   The Reds: those last hours, they felt warm       Who stood fast to their station. You needn’t fear what your life meant; You won’t curse how your hours were spent;   You’ll grow like your own monument     To all things sure and good, Fixed like a frieze in high relief Of granite figures that our Chief Accepts into His true belief,     His true blood-brotherhood. You’ll never bite the hand that fed you,   Won’t turn away from those that bred you,   Comforted your nights and led you     Into the thought of virtue; You won’t be turned from your own bed;   Won’t turn into that thing you dread;   No new betrayal lies ahead;     Now no one else can hurt you.
***
Stand back, make way, you mindless scum,   Squire Voland the Seducer’s come— Old Bock from Babelsberg whose tower   Falls silent now, whose shrunken power   For lies or lays comes hobbling home   Into this concrete catacomb. Here’s Runty Joe, the cunt collector   Who grew to greatness, first erector   Of myths and missions, fibs and fables, Who pulled the wool then turned the tables:   He piped the tunes and called the dance   Where shirtless countries lost their pants. Goatfooted Pan, the nation’s gander To whom Pan-Germans all played pander,   The jovial cob-swan quick to cover   Lida Baarova, his check-list lover;   Swellfoot the Tyrant, he could riddle   Men’s minds away, hi-diddle-diddle. Our little Doctor, Joe the Gimp   Comes back to limpness and his limp:   Hephaistos, Vulcan the lame smith   Whose net of lies caught one true myth:   His wife, the famous beauty, whored   By numbskull Mars, the dull warlord. What if I took my little fling   At conquest, at adventuring. Pried the lid of Pandora’s box off— There’s nothing there to bring your rocks off.   I never saw one fucking day   So fine I courted it to stay. If I got snarled in my own mesh Of thighs and bellies, who wants flesh?   I never hankered after matter. Let Hermann swell up, grosser, fatter,   Weighed down by medals, houses, clothing;   They leave me lean, secured in loathing. As a young man, I pricked the bubble   Of every creed; I saw that rubble And offered myself the realms of earth   Just to say Yes. But what’s it worth?   No thank you, Ma’am. Behold the Ram   Of God: I doubt, therefore I am. Here I forsake that long pricktease   Of histories, hopes, lusts, luxuries.   I come back to my first Ideal— The vacancy that’s always real.   I sniffed out all life’s openings:   I loved only the holes in things. So strip down one bare cell for this   Lay Brother of the last abyss. To me, still, all abstractions smell;   My head and nose clear in this cell   Of concrete, this confession booth   Where liars face up to blank truth. My tongue lashed millions to the knife;   Here, I’ll hold hands with my soiled wife.   My lies piped men out, hot to slaughter;   Here, I’ll read stories to my daughter   Then hack off all relations, choose   Only the Nothing you can’t lose, Send back this body, fixed in its   Infantile paralysis. I was born small; I shall grow less   Till I burst into Nothingness, That slot in time where only pure   Spirit extends, absent and sure. I am that spirit that denies, High Priest of Laymen, Prince of Lies.   Your house is founded on my rock;   Truth crows; now I deny my cock.   Jock of this walk, I turn down all,   Robbing my Peter to play Paul. I give up all goods I possess To build my faith on faithlessness. Black Peter, I belie my Lord— You’ve got to die to spread the Word.   Now the last act; there’s no sequel. Soon, once more, all things shall be equal.
***
And why, Herr Reichsmarschall, is Italy   Just like schnitzel? If they’re beaten   Either one will just get bigger. Neither cuts too firm a figure. ***
Observe the cautious toadstools      still on the lawn today though they grow over-evening;      sun shrinks them away. Pale and proper and rootless,      they righteously extort their living from the living.     I have been their sort. See by our blocked foundation      the cold, archaic clay, stiff and clinging and sterile      as children mold at play or as the Lord God fashioned      before He breathed it breath. The earth we dig and carry     for flowers, is strong in death. Woman, we are the rich     soil, friable and humble,  where all our murders rot,     where our old deaths crumble  and fortify my reach     far from you, wide and free,  though I have set my root      in you and am your tree.
***
Strong ankled, sun burned, almost naked, The daughters of California   Educate reluctant humanists; Drive into their skulls with tennis balls The unhappy realization That nature is still stronger than man. The special Hellenic privilege   Of the special intellect seeps out   At last in this irrigated soil. Sweat of athletes and juice of lovers Are stronger than Socrates’ hemlock; And the games of scrupulous Euclid Vanish in the gymnopaedia.
***
The summer of nineteen eighteen   I read The Jungle and The Research Magnificent. That fall   My father died and my aunt   Took me to Chicago to live.   The first thing I did was to take   A streetcar to the stockyards.   In the winter afternoon,   Gritty and fetid, I walked Through the filthy snow, through the   Squalid streets, looking shyly   Into the people’s faces, Those who were home in the daytime.   Debauched and exhausted faces,   Starved and looted brains, faces   Like the faces in the senile   And insane wards of charity   Hospitals. Predatory Faces of little children. Then as the soiled twilight darkened,   Under the green gas lamps, and the   Sputtering purple arc lamps,   The faces of the men coming Home from work, some still alive with   The last pulse of hope or courage,   Some sly and bitter, some smart and   Silly, most of them already   Broken and empty, no life,   Only blinding tiredness, worse   Than any tired animal.   The sour smells of a thousand   Suppers of fried potatoes and   Fried cabbage bled into the street.   I was giddy and sick, and out   Of my misery I felt rising   A terrible anger and out Of the anger, an absolute vow.   Today the evil is clean And prosperous, but it is   Everywhere, you don’t have to   Take a streetcar to find it, And it is the same evil. And the misery, and the Anger, and the vow are the same.
***
Somebody has given my Baby daughter a box of Old poker chips to play with.   Today she hands me one while   I am sitting with my tired   Brain at my desk. It is red.   On it is a picture of An elk’s head and the letters   B.P.O.E.—a chip from A small town Elks’ Club. I flip   It idly in the air and Catch it and do a coin trick   To amuse my little girl. Suddenly everything slips aside.   I see my father Doing the very same thing,   Whistling “Beautiful Dreamer,”   His breath smelling richly Of whiskey and cigars. I can   Hear him coming home drunk   From the Elks’ Club in Elkhart   Indiana, bumping the Chairs in the dark. I can see   Him dying of cirrhosis Of the liver and stomach Ulcers and pneumonia, Or, as he said on his deathbed, of   Crooked cards and straight whiskey,   Slow horses and fast women.
***
You were a girl of satin and gauze Now you are my mountain and waterfall companion.   Long ago I read those lines of Po Chu I   Written in his middle age. Young as I was they touched me. I never thought in my own middle age   I would have a beautiful young dancer To wander with me by falling crystal waters,   Among mountains of snow and granite,   Least of all that unlike Po’s girl She would be my very daughter. The earth turns towards the sun.   Summer comes to the mountains.   Blue grouse drum in the red fir woods   All the bright long days. You put blue jay and flicker feathers   In your hair. Two and two violet green swallows   Play over the lake. The blue birds have come back To nest on the little island. The swallows sip water on the wing   And play at love and dodge and swoop Just like the swallows that swirl   Under and over the Ponte Vecchio.   Light rain crosses the lake Hissing faintly. After the rain There are giant puffballs with tortoise shell backs   At the edge of the meadow. Snows of a thousand winters Melt in the sun of one summer.   Wild cyclamen bloom by the stream.   Trout veer in the transparent current. In the evening marmots bark in the rocks. The Scorpion curls over the glimmering ice field. A white crowned night sparrow sings as the moon sets.   Thunder growls far off. Our campfire is a single light Amongst a hundred peaks and waterfalls. The manifold voices of falling water Talk all night. Wrapped in your down bag   Starlight on your cheeks and eyelids Your breath comes and goes In a tiny cloud in the frosty night. Ten thousand birds sing in the sunrise. Ten thousand years revolve without change. All this will never be again.
***
The mountain road ends here,   Broken away in the chasm where   The bridge washed out years ago.   The first scarlet larkspur glitters   In the first patch of April Morning sunlight. The engorged creek   Roars and rustles like a military   Ball. Here by the waterfall,   Insuperable life, flushed With the equinox, sentient   And sentimental, falls away To the sea and death. The tissue   Of sympathy and agony That binds the flesh in its Nessus' shirt;   The clotted cobweb of unself   And self; sheds itself and flecks   The sun's bed with darts of blossom   Like flagellant blood above   The water bursting in the vibrant   Air. This ego, bound by personal   Tragedy and the vast Impersonal vindictiveness Of the ruined and ruining world,   Pauses in this immortality, As passionate, as apathetic, As the lava flow that burned here once;   And stopped here; and said, 'This far   And no further.' And spoke thereafter   In the simple diction of stone. Naked in the warm April air,   We lie under the redwoods,   In the sunny lee of a cliff.   As you kneel above me I see   Tiny red marks on your flanks Like bites, where the redwood cones   Have pressed into your flesh.   You can find just the same marks   In the lignite in the cliff Over our heads. Sequoia Langsdorfii***
SPRING, COAST RANGE The glow of my campfire is dark red and flameless,   The circle of white ash widens around it. I get up and walk off in the moonlight and each time   I look back the red is deeper and the light smaller.   Scorpio rises late with Mars caught in his claw;   The moon has come before them, the light   Like a choir of children in the young laurel trees.   It is April; the shad, the hot headed fish, Climbs the rivers; there is trillium in the damp canyons;   The foetid adder’s tongue lolls by the waterfall. There was a farm at this campsite once, it is almost gone now.   There were sheep here after the farm, and fire   Long ago burned the redwoods out of the gulch,   The Douglas fir off the ridge; today the soil   Is stony and incoherent, the small stones lie flat   And plate the surface like scales. Twenty years ago the spreading gully Toppled the big oak over onto the house.   Now there is nothing left but the foundations   Hidden in poison oak, and above on the ridge,   Six lonely, ominous fenceposts; The redwood beams of the barn make a footbridge   Over the deep waterless creek bed; The hills are covered with wild oats Dry and white by midsummer. I walk in the random survivals of the orchard.   In a patch of moonlight a mole Shakes his tunnel like an angry vein; Orion walks waist deep in the fog coming in from the ocean;   Leo crouches under the zenith. There are tiny hard fruits already on the plum trees.   The purity of the apple blossoms is incredible.   As the wind dies down their fragrance Clusters around them like thick smoke. All the day they roared with bees, in the moonlight   They are silent and immaculate.              SPRING, SIERRA NEVADA Once more golden Scorpio glows over the col   Above Deadman Canyon, orderly and brilliant,   Like an inspiration in the brain of Archimedes.   I have seen its light over the warm sea, Over the coconut beaches, phosphorescent and pulsing;   And the living light in the water Shivering away from the swimming hand, Creeping against the lips, filling the floating hair. Here where the glaciers have been and the snow stays late,   The stone is clean as light, the light steady as stone. The relationship of stone, ice and stars is systematic and enduring:   Novelty emerges after centuries, a rock spalls from the cliffs,   The glacier contracts and turns grayer, The stream cuts new sinuosities in the meadow,   The sun moves through space and the earth with it,   The stars change places.                                     The snow has lasted longer this year,   Than anyone can remember. The lowest meadow is a lake,   The next two are snowfields, the pass is covered with snow,   Only the steepest rocks are bare. Between the pass   And the last meadow the snowfield gapes for a hundred feet,   In a narrow blue chasm through which a waterfall drops,   Spangled with sunset at the top, black and muscular   Where it disappears again in the snow. The world is filled with hidden running water   That pounds in the ears like ether; The granite needles rise from the snow, pale as steel;   Above the copper mine the cliff is blood red,   The white snow breaks at the edge of it; The sky comes close to my eyes like the blue eyes   Of someone kissed in sleep.                                         I descend to camp, To the young, sticky, wrinkled aspen leaves, To the first violets and wild cyclamen, And cook supper in the blue twilight. All night deer pass over the snow on sharp hooves,   In the darkness their cold muzzles find the new grass   At the edge of the snow.              FALL, SIERRA NEVADA This morning the hermit thrush was absent at breakfast,   His place was taken by a family of chickadees;   At noon a flock of humming birds passed south,   Whirling in the wind up over the saddle between   Ritter and Banner, following the migration lane   Of the Sierra crest southward to Guatemala. All day cloud shadows have moved over the face of the mountain,   The shadow of a golden eagle weaving between them   Over the face of the glacier. At sunset the half-moon rides on the bent back of the Scorpion,   The Great Bear kneels on the mountain. Ten degrees below the moon Venus sets in the haze arising from the Great Valley. Jupiter, in opposition to the sun, rises in the alpenglow   Between the burnt peaks. The ventriloquial belling   Of an owl mingles with the bells of the waterfall.   Now there is distant thunder on the east wind.   The east face of the mountain above me Is lit with far off lightnings and the sky Above the pass blazes momentarily like an aurora.   It is storming in the White Mountains, On the arid fourteen-thousand-foot peaks; Rain is falling on the narrow gray ranges And dark sedge meadows and white salt flats of Nevada.   Just before moonset a small dense cumulus cloud,   Gleaming like a grape cluster of metal, Moves over the Sierra crest and grows down the westward slope. Frost, the color and quality of the cloud, Lies over all the marsh below my campsite. The wiry clumps of dwarfed whitebark pines   Are smoky and indistinct in the moonlight,   Only their shadows are really visible. The lake is immobile and holds the stars And the peaks deep in itself without a quiver.   In the shallows the geometrical tendrils of ice   Spread their wonderful mathematics in silence.   All night the eyes of deer shine for an instant As they cross the radius of my firelight. In the morning the trail will look like a sheep driveway,   All the tracks will point down to the lower canyon.   “Thus,” says Tyndall, “the concerns of this little place   Are changed and fashioned by the obliquity of the earth’s axis, The chain of dependence which runs through creation,   And links the roll of a planet alike with the interests   Of marmots and of men.”
***
For a month now, wandering over the Sierras,   A poem had been gathering in my mind,   Details of significance and rhythm, The way poems do, but still lacking a focus.   Last night I remembered the date and it all   Began to grow together and take on purpose.    We sat up late while Deneb moved over the zenith   And I told Marie all about Boston, how it looked   That last terrible week, how hundreds stood weeping   Impotent in the streets that last midnight. I told her how those hours changed the lives of thousands, How America was forever a different place   Afterwards for many.                               In the morning We swam in the cold transparent lake, the blue   Damsel flies on all the reeds like millions   Of narrow metallic flowers, and I thought   Of you behind the grille in Dedham, Vanzetti, Saying, “Who would ever have thought we would make this history?” Crossing the brilliant mile-square meadow   Illuminated with asters and cyclamen,   The pollen of the lodgepole pines drifting   With the shifting wind over it and the blue   And sulphur butterflies drifting with the wind,   I saw you in the sour prison light, saying,   “Goodbye comrade.”                            In the basin under the crest Where the pines end and the Sierra primrose begins,   A party of lawyers was shooting at a whiskey bottle.   The bottle stayed on its rock, nobody could hit it. Looking back over the peaks and canyons from the last lake,   The pattern of human beings seemed simpler   Than the diagonals of water and stone.   Climbing the chute, up the melting snow and broken rock, I remembered what you said about Sacco, How it slipped your mind and you demanded it be read into the record. Traversing below the ragged arête, One cheek pressed against the rock The wind slapping the other, I saw you both marching in an army You with the red and black flag, Sacco with the rattlesnake banner. I kicked steps up the last snow bank and came   To the indescribably blue and fragrant Polemonium and the dead sky and the sterile Crystalline granite and final monolith of the summit.   These are the things that will last a long time, Vanzetti, I am glad that once on your day I have stood among them.   Some day mountains will be named after you and Sacco.   They will be here and your name with them, “When these days are but a dim remembering of the time   When man was wolf to man.” I think men will be remembering you a long time   Standing on the mountains Many men, a long time, comrade.
***
I don’t mind the human race.   I’ve got pretty used to them   In these past twenty-five years.   I don’t mind if they sit next   To me on streetcars, or eat   In the same restaurants, if   It’s not at the same table.   However, I don’t approve   Of a woman I respect Dancing with one of them. I’ve   Tried asking them to my home   Without success. I shouldn’t   Care to see my own sister   Marry one. Even if she Loved him, think of the children.   Their art is interesting,   But certainly barbarous.   I’m sure, if given a chance,   They’d kill us all in our beds.   And you must admit, they smell.
***
Trees in the old days used to stand  And shape a shady lane Where lovers wandered hand in hand  Who came from Carentan. This was the shining green canal  Where we came two by two  Walking at combat-interval.  Such trees we never knew. The day was early June, the ground  Was soft and bright with dew.  Far away the guns did sound, But here the sky was blue. The sky was blue, but there a smoke  Hung still above the sea Where the ships together spoke  To towns we could not see. Could you have seen us through a glass  You would have said a walk  Of farmers out to turn the grass,  Each with his own hay-fork. The watchers in their leopard suits  Waited till it was time, And aimed between the belt and boot  And let the barrel climb. I must lie down at once, there is  A hammer at my knee. And call it death or cowardice,  Don’t count again on me. Everything’s all right, Mother,  Everyone gets the same  At one time or another.  It’s all in the game. I never strolled, nor ever shall,  Down such a leafy lane. I never drank in a canal, Nor ever shall again. There is a whistling in the leaves  And it is not the wind, The twigs are falling from the knives  That cut men to the ground. Tell me, Master-Sergeant,  The way to turn and shoot.  But the Sergeant’s silent  That taught me how to do it. O Captain, show us quickly  Our place upon the map.  But the Captain’s sickly And taking a long nap. Lieutenant, what’s my duty,  My place in the platoon? He too’s a sleeping beauty,  Charmed by that strange tune. Carentan O Carentan Before we met with you We never yet had lost a man  Or known what death could do.
***
I dreamed that in a city dark as Paris   I stood alone in a deserted square.   The night was trembling with a violet   Expectancy. At the far edge it moved   And rumbled; on that flickering horizon   The guns were pumping color in the sky. There was the Front. But I was lonely here,   Left behind, abandoned by the army.   The empty city and the empty square   Was my inhabitation, my unrest.   The helmet with its vestige of a crest,   The rifle in my hands, long out of date,   The belt I wore, the trailing overcoat   And hobnail boots, were those of a poilu.   I was the man, as awkward as a bear. Over the rooftops where cathedrals loomed   In speaking majesty, two aeroplanes Forlorn as birds, appeared. Then growing large,   The German Taube and the Nieuport Scout, They chased each other tumbling through the sky,   Till one streamed down on fire to the earth. These wars have been so great, they are forgotten   Like the Egyptian dynasts. My confrere   In whose thick boots I stood, were you amazed   To wander through my brain four decades later   As I have wandered in a dream through yours? The violence of waking life disrupts The order of our death. Strange dreams occur,   For dreams are licensed as they never were.
***
A siren sang, and Europe turned away From the high castle and the shepherd’s crook.   Three caravels went sailing to Cathay On the strange ocean, and the captains shook   Their banners out across the Mexique Bay. And in our early days we did the same.   Remembering our fathers in their wreck We crossed the sea from Palos where they came   And saw, enormous to the little deck,   A shore in silence waiting for a name. The treasures of Cathay were never found.   In this America, this wilderness Where the axe echoes with a lonely sound,   The generations labor to possess And grave by grave we civilize the ground.
***
My father in the night commanding No Has work to do. Smoke issues from his lips;         He reads in silence. The frogs are croaking and the street lamps glow. And then my mother winds the gramophone;   The Bride of Lammermoor begins to shriek—       Or reads a story— About a prince, a castle, and a dragon. The moon is glittering above the hill. I stand before the gateposts of the King—       So runs the story Of Thule, at midnight when the mice are still. And I have been in Thule! It has come true— The journey and the danger of the world,         All that there is To bear and to enjoy, endure and do. Landscapes, seascapes ... where have I been led?   The names of cities—Paris, Venice, Rome—       Held out their arms. A feathered god, seductive, went ahead. Here is my house. Under a red rose tree   A child is swinging; another gravely plays.         They are not surprised That I am here; they were expecting me. And yet my father sits and reads in silence,   My mother sheds a tear, the moon is still,         And the dark wind Is murmuring that nothing ever happens. Beyond his jurisdiction as I move Do I not prove him wrong? And yet, it’s true         They will not change There, on the stage of terror and of love. The actors in that playhouse always sit   In fixed positions—father, mother, child       With painted eyes. How sad it is to be a little puppet! Their heads are wooden. And you once pretended   To understand them! Shake them as you will,         They cannot speak. Do what you will, the comedy is ended. Father, why did you work? Why did you weep,   Mother? Was the story so important?       “Listen!” the wind Said to the children, and they fell asleep.
***
On the lawn at the villa— That’s the way to start, eh, reader? We know where we stand—somewhere expensive— You and I imperturbes, as Walt would say, Before the diversions of wealth, you and I engagés. On the lawn at the villa Sat a manufacturer of explosives,  His wife from Paris, And a young man named Bruno, And myself, being American, Willing to talk to these malefactors, The manufacturer of explosives, and so on, But somehow superior. By that I mean democratic. It’s complicated, being an American, Having the money and the bad conscience, both at the same time.  Perhaps, after all, this is not the right subject for a poem. We were all sitting there paralyzed In the hot Tuscan afternoon, And the bodies of the machine-gun crew were draped over the balcony. So we sat there all afternoon.
***
The man who married Magdalene  Had not forgiven her. God might pardon every sin ...  Love is no pardoner. Her hands were hollow, pale, and blue,  Her mouth like watered wine. He watched to see if she were true  And waited for a sign. It was old harlotry, he guessed,  That drained her strength away,  So gladly for the dark she dressed,  So sadly for the day. Their quarrels made her dull and weak  And soon a man might fit A penny in the hollow cheek And never notice it. At last, as they exhausted slept,  Death granted the divorce,  And nakedly the woman leapt  Upon that narrow horse. But when he woke and woke alone  He wept and would deny The loose behavior of the bone  And the immodest thigh.
***
The dark streets are deserted,  With only a drugstore glowing  Softly, like a sleeping body; With one white, naked bulb  In the back, that shines  On suicides and abortions. Who lives in these dark houses?  I am suddenly aware  I might live here myself. The garage man returns And puts the change in my hand,  Counting the singles carefully.
***
Everyone at Lake Kearney had a nickname:  there was a Bumstead, a Tonto, a Tex,  and, from the slogan of a popular orchestra,  two sisters, Swing and Sway. Swing jitterbugged, hopping around on the dance floor, working up a sweat. Sway was beautiful. My heart went out to her  when she lifted her heavy rack of dishes  and passed through the swinging door. She was engaged, to an enlisted man  who was stationed at Fort Dix. He came once or twice on weekends to see her. I tried talking to him, but he didn’t answer ... out of stupidity  or dislike, I could not tell which. In real life he was a furniture salesman.  This was the hero on whom she had chosen  to bestow her affections. I told her of my ambition: to write novels conveying the excitement  of life ... the main building lit up like a liner on Saturday night; the sound of the band ... clarinet,  saxophone, snare drum, piano. He who would know your heart (America)  must seek it in your songs. And the contents of your purse ...  among Kleenex, aspirin,  chewing gum wrappers, combs, et cetera. “Don’t stop,” she said, “I’m listening.  Here it is!” flourishing her lighter.          * In the afternoon when the dishes were washed  and tables wiped, we rowed out on the lake.  I read aloud ... The Duino Elegies, while she reclined, one shapely knee up,  trailing a hand in the water. She had chestnut-colored hair. Her eyes were changing like the surface  with ripples and the shadows of clouds. “Beauty,” I read to her, “is nothing but beginning of Terror we’re still just able to bear.”          * She came from Jersey, the industrial wasteland  behind which Manhattan suddenly rises.  I could visualize the street where she lived,  and see her muffled against the cold,  in galoshes, trudging to school.  Running about in tennis shoes  all through the summer ...  I could hear the porch swing squeak  and see into the parlor. It was divided by a curtain or screen ...  “That’s it,” she said, “all but the screen.  There isn’t any.” When she or her sister had a boyfriend  their mother used to stay in the parlor,  pretending to sew, and keeping an eye on them  like Fate. At night she would lie awake looking at the sky, spangled over. Her thoughts were as deep and wide as the sky.  As time went by she had a feeling of missing out ... that everything was happening somewhere else. Some of the kids she grew up with went crazy ... like a car turning over and over. One of her friends had been beaten  by the police. Some vital fluid  seemed to have gone out of him. His arms and legs shook. Busted springs.          * She said, “When you’re a famous novelist  will you write about me?” I promised ... and tried to keep my promise. Recently, looking for a toolbox, I came upon some typewritten pages, all about her. There she is in a canoe ... a gust of wind rustling the leaves along the shore. Playing tennis, running up and down the baseline.  Down by the boathouse, listening to the orchestra  playing “Sleepy Lagoon.” Then the trouble begins. I can never think of anything  to make the characters do. We are still sitting in the moonlight while she finishes her cigarette. Two people go by, talking in low voices. A car door slams. Driving off ...  “I suppose we ought to go,”  I say.                    And she says, “Not yet.”
***
Vandergast to his neighbors— the grinding of a garage door and hiss of gravel in the driveway. He worked for the insurance company  whose talisman is a phoenix rising in flames ... non omnis moriar. From his desk he had a view of the street— translucent raincoats, and umbrellas,  fluorescent plate-glass windows.  A girl knelt down, arranging underwear on a female dummy— sea waves and, on the gale,  Venus, these busy days, poised in her garter belt and stockings.          * The next day he saw her eating in the restaurant where he usually ate. Soon they were having lunch together  elsewhere.                 She came from Dallas. This was only a start, she was ambitious,  twenty-five and still unmarried. Green eyes with silver spiricles ... red hair ...                   When he held the car door open  her legs were smooth and slender. “I was wondering,” she said, “when you'd get round to it,”  and laughed.          * Vandergast says he never intended  having an affair.                            And was that what this was?  The names that people give to things ... What do definitions and divorce-court proceedings  have to do with the breathless reality? O little lamp at the bedside with views of Venice and the Bay of Naples,  you understood! Lactona toothbrush and suitcase bought in a hurry, you were the witnesses of the love we made in bed together. Schrafft's Chocolate Cherries, surely you remember  when she said she'd be true forever, and, watching “Dark Storm,” we decided  there is something to be said, after all, for soap opera, “if it makes people happy.”          * The Vandergasts are having some trouble  finding a buyer for their house. When I go for a walk with Tippy  I pass the unweeded tennis court, the empty garage, windows heavily shuttered. Mrs. Vandergast took the children  and went back to her family. And Vandergast moved to New Jersey,  where he works for an insurance company  whose emblem is the Rock of Gibraltar— the rest of his life laid out with the child-support and alimony payments. As for the girl, she vanished. Was it worth it? Ask Vandergast. You'd have to be Vandergast, looking through his eyes  at the house across the street, in Orange, New Jersey.  Maybe on wet days umbrellas and raincoats set his heart thudding.                                   Maybe he talks to his pillow, and it whispers,  moving red hair. In any case, he will soon be forty. 
***
Look! From my window there’s a view  of city streets where only lives as dry as tortoises  can crawl—the Gallapagos of desire. There is the day of Negroes with red hair and the day of insane women on the subway;  there is the day of the word Trieste and the night of the blind man with the electric guitar. But I have no profession. Like a spy I read the papers—Situations Wanted.  Surely there is a secret which, if I knew it, would change everything! 2 I have the poor man’s nerve-tic, irony. I see through the illusions of the age! The bell tolls, and the hearse advances, and the mourners follow, for my entertainment. I tread the burning pavement, the streets where drunkards stretch  like photographs of civil death and trumpets strangle in electric shelves. The mannequins stare at me scornfully.  I know they are pretending all day to be in earnest. And can it be that love is an illusion? When darkness falls on the enormous street  the air is filled with Eros, whispering.  Eyes, mouths, contrive to meet in silence, fearing they may be prevented. 3 O businessmen like ruins,  bankers who are Bastilles, widows, sadder than the shores of lakes, then you were happy, when you still could tremble! But all night long my window sheds tears of light. I seek the word. The word is not forthcoming.  O syllables of light ... O dark cathedral ...
***
I wake and feel the city trembling. Yes, there is something unsettled in the air   And the earth is uncertain. And so it was for the tenor Caruso. He couldn’t sleep—you know how the ovation   Rings in your ears, and you re-sing your part. And then the ceiling trembled And the floor moved. He ran into the street.   Never had Naples given him such a reception! The air was darker than Vesuvius.   “O mamma mia,” He cried, “I’ve lost my voice!” At that moment the hideous voice of Culture,   Hysterical woman, thrashing her arms and legs,   Shrieked from the ruins. At that moment everyone became a performer.   Otello and Don Giovanni   And Figaro strode on the midmost stage. In the high window of a burning castle   Lucia raved. Black horses Plunged through fire, dragging the wild bells. The curtains were wrapped in smoke. Tin swords   Were melting; masks and ruffs Burned—and the costumes of the peasants’ chorus. Night fell. The white moon rose   And sank in the Pacific. The tremors   Passed under the waves. And Death rested. 2 Now, as we stand idle, Watching the silent, bowler-hatted man, The engineer, who writes in the smoking field; Now as he hands the paper to a boy, Who takes it and runs to a group of waiting men,   And they disperse and move toward their wagons, Mules bray and the wagons move— Wait! Before you start (Already the wheels are rattling on the stones) Say, did your fathers cross the dry Sierras   To build another London? Do Americans always have to be second-rate? Wait! For there are spirits In the earth itself, or the air, or sea.   Where are the aboriginal American devils? Cloud shadows, pine shadows Falling across the bright Pacific bay ...    (Already they have nailed rough boards together) Wait only for the wind That rustles in the eucalyptus tree.   Wait only for the light That trembles on the petals of a rose. (The mortar sets—banks are the first to stand)   Wait for a rose, and you may wait forever. The silent man mops his head and drinks   Cold lemonade. “San Francisco   Is a city second only to Paris.” 3 Every night, at the end of America We taste our wine, looking at the Pacific.   How sad it is, the end of America! While we were waiting for the land   They’d finished it—with gas drums On the hilltops, cheap housing in the valleys Where lives are mean and wretched.   But the banks thrive and the realtors   Rejoice—they have their America. Still, there is something unsettled in the air.   Out there on the Pacific   There’s no America but the Marines. Whitman was wrong about the People, But right about himself. The land is within. At the end of the open road we come to ourselves. Though mad Columbus follows the sun   Into the sea, we cannot follow. We must remain, to serve the returning sun, And to set tables for death. For we are the colonists of Death— Not, as some think, of the English. And we are preparing thrones for him to sit,   Poems to read, and beds   In which it may please him to rest. This is the land The pioneers looked for, shading their eyes   Against the sun—a murmur of serious life.
***
In the clear light that confuses everything   Only you, dark laurel,   Shadow my house, Lifting your arms in the anguish   Of nature at the stake. And at night, quivering with tears, You are like the tree called Tasso’s.   Crippled, and hooped with iron,   It stands on Peter’s hill. When the lovers prop their bicycles   And sit on the high benches   That look across to eternity, That tree makes their own torsion Seem natural. And so, they’re comforted. 2 One of the local philosophers ...   He says, “In California We have the old anarchist tradition.” What can he mean? Is there an anarchist tradition?   And why would an anarchist want one?   O California, Is there a tree without opinions?   Come, let me clasp you!   Let me feel the idea breathing. I too cry O for a life of sensations   Rather than thoughts— “The sayling Pine, the Cedar proud and tall.” Like the girls in our neighborhood,   They’re beautiful and silent. 3 As I was digging in the back yard   I thought of a man in China. A lifetime, it seemed, we gazed at each other. I could see and hear his heartbeats   Like a spade hurling clods. He pointed behind him, and I saw That the hills were covered with armed men,   And they were all on the other side   Of the life that I held dear. He said, “We are as various   As the twigs of a tree, But now the tree moves as one man. It walks. And the earth trembles   When a race of slaves is leaving.” 4 I said, “Yet, all these people   Will fall down as one man When the entrails of a bomb are breathing. When we came down from Chosin   Carrying the guns in dainty snow-wear   And all the dead we had to, It was a time of forgetfulness,   Like a plucked string.   It was a river of darkness. Was it not so on your side, when you came   To the sea that was covered with ships?   Let us speak to each other, Let the word rise, making dark strokes in the air.   That bird flies over the heads of the armed men.” 5 One part of the tree grows outward.   The other I saw when, with a light, I explored the cellar—shattering roots. They had broken through the wall, As though there were something in my rubbish   That life would have at last. I must be patient with shapes Of automobile fenders and ketchup bottles.   These things are the beginning Of things not visible to the naked eye.   It was so in the time of Tobit— The dish glowed when the angel held it. It is so that spiritual messengers   Deliver their meaning.
***
A man stood in the laurel tree Adjusting his hands and feet to the boughs.  He said, “Today I was breaking stones  On a mountain road in Asia, When suddenly I had a vision Of mankind, like grass and flowers,  The same over all the earth. We forgave each other; we gave ourselves  Wholly over to words. And straightway I was released  And sprang through an open gate.” I said, “Into a meadow?” He said, “I am impervious to irony.  I thank you for the word ...  I am standing in a sunlit meadow.  Know that everything your senses reject  Springs up in the spiritual world.” I said, “Our scientists have another opinion.  They say, you are merely phenomena.” He said, “Over here they will be angels  Singing, Holy holy be His Name! And also, it works in reverse. Things which to us in the pure state are mysterious,  Are your simplest articles of household use— A chair, a dish, and meaner even than these,  The very latest inventions. Machines are the animals of the Americans— Tell me about machines.” I said, “I have suspected The Mixmaster knows more than I do,  The air conditioner is the better poet. My right front tire is as bald as Odysseus— How much it must have suffered! Then, as things have a third substance  Which is obscure to both our senses, Let there be a perpetual coming and going  Between your house and mine.”
***
Time collapses between the lips of strangers   my days collapse into a hollow tube soon implodes against now like an iron wall my eyes are blocked with rubble a smear of perspectives blurring each horizon in the breathless precision of silence one word is made. Once the renegade flesh was gone   fall air lay against my face sharp and blue as a needle but the rain fell through October   and death lay    a condemnation   within my blood. The smell of your neck in August   a fine gold wire bejeweling war   all the rest lies illusive as a farmhouse on the other side of a valley vanishing in the afternoon. Day three    day four    day ten   the seventh step a veiled door leading to my golden anniversary   flameproofed free-paper shredded   in the teeth of a pillaging dog   never to dream of spiders   and when they turned the hoses upon me a burst of light.
***
A man walks beside them  with a whip that he cracks.  The cart they draw is painted  with Saracens and Crusaders, fierce eyes and ranks of spears. They are on the steep road  that goes up the mountain.  Their neat-stepping hoofs  appear to be flickering  in the sun, raising dust. They are higher than the roofs on which striped gourds and melons  lie ripening. They move among the dark green olives that grow on the rocks. they dwindle as they climb ...  vanish around a corner and reappear walking on the edge  of a precipice. They enter the region of mist and darkness. I think I can see them still:  a pair of yoked oxen the color of ivory or smoke, with red tassels,  in the gathering dusk.
***
Sex fingers toes in the marketplace near your father's church in Hamlet, North Carolina— witness to this love in this calm fallow of these minds, there is no substitute for pain:  genitals gone or going, seed burned out, you tuck the roots in the earth,  turn back, and move by river through the swamps, singing: a love supreme, a love supreme; what does it all mean? Loss, so great each black woman expects your failure in mute change, the seed gone. You plod up into the electric city— your song now crystal and  the blues. You pick up the horn  with some will and blow into the freezing night: a love supreme, a love supreme— Dawn comes and you cook  up the thick sin 'tween  impotence and death, fuel the tenor sax cannibal heart, genitals, and sweat that makes you clean— a love supreme, a love supreme— Why you so black? cause I am why you so funky? cause I am why you so black? cause I am why you so sweet? cause I am why you so black? cause I am a love supreme, a love supreme:***
In 1915 my grandfather’s neighbors surrounded his house near the dayline he ran on the Hudson in Catskill, NY and thought they’d burn his family out in a movie they’d just seen and be rid of his kind: the death of a lone black family is the Birth of a Nation, or so they thought. His 5’4” waiter gait quenched the white jacket smile he’d brought back from watered polish of my father on the turning seats, and he asked his neighbors up on his thatched porch for the first blossom of fire that would bring him down. They went away, his nation, spittooning their torched necks in the shadows of the riverboat they’d seen, posse decomposing; and I see him on Sutter with white bag from your restaurant, challenged by his first grandson to a foot-race he will win in white clothes. I see him as he buys galoshes for his railed yard near Mineo’s metal shop, where roses jump as the el circles his house toward Brooklyn, where his rain fell; and I see cigar smoke in his eyes, chocolate Madison Square Garden chews he breaks on his set teeth, stitched up after cancer, the great white nation immovable as his weight wilts and he is on a porch that won’t hold my arms, or the legs of the race run forwards, or the film played backwards on his grandson’s eyes.
***
I place these numbed wrists to the pane  watching white uniforms whisk over him in the tube-kept prison fear what they will do in experiment watch my gloved stickshifting gasolined hands  breathe boxcar-information-please infirmary tubes  distrusting white-pink mending paperthin  silkened end hairs, distrusting tubes shrunk in his trunk-skincapped ***
In the south, sleeping against the drugstore, growling under   the trucks and stoves, stumbling   through and over the cluttered eyes   of early mysterious night. Frowning   drunk waving moving a hand or lash.   Dancing kneeling reaching out, letting   a hand rest in shadows. Squatting   to drink or pee. Stretching to climb   pulling themselves onto horses near   where there was sea (the old songs   lead you to believe). Riding out   from this town, to another, where   it is also black. Down a road where people are asleep. Towards   the moon or the shadows of houses.   Towards the songs’ pretended sea.
***
He came back and shot. He shot him. When he came   back, he shot, and he fell, stumbling, past the   shadow wood, down, shot, dying, dead, to full halt. At the bottom, bleeding, shot dead. He died then, there   after the fall, the speeding bullet, tore his face   and blood sprayed fine over the killer and the grey light. Pictures of the dead man, are everywhere. And his spirit   sucks up the light. But he died in darkness darker than   his soul and everything tumbled blindly with him dying down the stairs.   We have no word on the killer, except he came back, from somewhere   to do what he did. And shot only once into his victim's stare, and left him quickly when the blood ran out. We know the killer was skillful, quick, and silent, and that the victim   probably knew him. Other than that, aside from the caked sourness   of the dead man's expression, and the cool surprise in the fixture of his hands and fingers, we know nothing.
***
The gaunt thing   with no organs creeps along the streets of Europe, she will commute, in her feathered bat stomach-gown with no organs with sores on her insides even her head a vast puschamber   of pus(sy) memories with no organs nothing to make babies she will be the great witch of euro-american legend who sucked the life from some unknown nigger whose name will be known but whose substance will not ever   not even by him who is dead in a pile of dopeskin This bitch killed a friend of mine named Bob Thompson   a black painter, a giant, once, she reduced to a pitiful imitation faggot full of American holes and a monkey on his back   slapped airplanes from the empire state building May this bitch and her sisters, all of them,   receive my words in all their orifices like lye mixed with   cocola and alaga syrup feel this shit, bitches, feel it, now laugh your   hysterectic laughs while your flesh burns and your eyes peel to red mud
***
Liebe, meine liebe, I had not hoped  to be so poor                    The night winds reach  like the blind breath of the world in a rhythm without mind, gusting and beating  as if to destroy us, battering our poverty  and all the land’s flat and cold and dark under iron snow                         the dog leaps in the wind  barking, maddened with winter, and his voice  claps again and again down the valley  like tatters of revolutionary pennants                                                          birches cry and hemlocks by the brook stand hunched and downcast with their hands  in their pockets Liebe, the world is wild  and without intention                                how far this might be from the night of Christmas  if it were not for you. Down the reaching wind shrieks of starlight bear broken messages among mountains where shadows plunge                                                       yet our brightness  is unwavering                    Kennst du das land  wo die zitronen blühn, im dunkeln laub die goldorangen ... liebe***
Sometimes I wish I were still out on the back porch, drinking jet fuel   with the boys, getting louder and louder   as the empty cans drop out of our paws   like booster rockets falling back to Earth and we soar up into the summer stars.   Summer. The big sky river rushes overhead,   bearing asteroids and mist, blind fish   and old space suits with skeletons inside.   On Earth, men celebrate their hairiness, and it is good, a way of letting life out of the box, uncapping the bottle to let the effervescence gush through the narrow, usually constricted neck. And now the crickets plug in their appliances   in unison, and then the fireflies flash dots and dashes in the grass, like punctuation   for the labyrinthine, untrue tales of sex   someone is telling in the dark, though no one really hears. We gaze into the night as if remembering the bright unbroken planet   we once came from, to which we will never   be permitted to return. We are amazed how hurt we are. We would give anything for what we have.
***
I Is the total black, being spoken From the earth's inside. There are many kinds of open. How a diamond comes into a knot of flame   How a sound comes into a word, coloured   By who pays what for speaking. Some words are open Like a diamond on glass windows Singing out within the crash of passing sun Then there are words like stapled wagers In a perforated book—buy and sign and tear apart— And come whatever wills all chances The stub remains An ill-pulled tooth with a ragged edge. Some words live in my throat Breeding like adders. Others know sun Seeking like gypsies over my tongue To explode through my lips Like young sparrows bursting from shell. Some words Bedevil me. Love is a word another kind of open— As a diamond comes into a knot of flame I am black because I come from the earth's inside   Take my word for jewel in your open light.
***
My mother had two faces and a frying pot   where she cooked up her daughters into girls before she fixed our dinner. My mother had two faces and a broken pot where she hid out a perfect daughter   who was not me I am the sun and moon and forever hungry   for her eyes. I bear two women upon my back   one dark and rich and hidden in the ivory hungers of the other   mother pale as a witch yet steady and familiar brings me bread and terror in my sleep her breasts are huge exciting anchors   in the midnight storm. All this has been before in my mother's bed time has no sense I have no brothers and my sisters are cruel. Mother I need mother I need mother I need your blackness now   as the august earth needs rain.   I am the sun and moon and forever hungry   the sharpened edge where day and night shall meet and not be one.
***
Coming together   it is easier to work   after our bodies   meet paper and pen neither care nor profit whether we write or not but as your body moves under my hands   charged and waiting   we cut the leash you create me against your thighs   hilly with images moving through our word countries   my body writes into your flesh the poem you make of me. Touching you I catch midnight   as moon fires set in my throat   I love you flesh into blossom   I made you and take you made into me.
***
I am fourteen and my skin has betrayed me   the boy I cannot live without   still sucks his thumb in secret how come my knees are always so ashy what if I die before morning and momma's in the bedroom   with the door closed. I have to learn how to dance   in time for the next party   my room is too small for me   suppose I die before graduation   they will sing sad melodies   but finally tell the truth about me There is nothing I want to do   and too much that has to be done and momma's in the bedroom   with the door closed. Nobody even stops to think   about my side of it I should have been on Math Team   my marks were better than his   why do I have to be the one wearing braces I have nothing to wear tomorrow   will I live long enough to grow up and momma's in the bedroom   with the door closed.
***
I have studied the tight curls on the back of your neck   moving away from me beyond anger or failure your face in the evening schools of longing through mornings of wish and ripen we were always saying goodbye in the blood in the bone over coffee before dashing for elevators going in opposite directions without goodbyes. Do not remember me as a bridge nor a roof   as the maker of legends nor as a trap door to that world where black and white clericals hang on the edge of beauty in five oclock elevators   twitching their shoulders to avoid other flesh   and now there is someone to speak for them   moving away from me into tomorrows   morning of wish and ripen your goodbye is a promise of lightning   in the last angels hand unwelcome and warning the sands have run out against us   we were rewarded by journeys away from each other into desire into mornings alone where excuse and endurance mingle   conceiving decision. Do not remember me as disaster nor as the keeper of secrets I am a fellow rider in the cattle cars watching you move slowly out of my bed   saying we cannot waste time only ourselves.
***
I However the image enters its force remains within my eyes rockstrewn caves where dragonfish evolve   wild for life, relentless and acquisitive   learning to survive where there is no food my eyes are always hungry and remembering however the image enters its force remains. A white woman stands bereft and empty a black boy hacked into a murderous lesson   recalled in me forever like a lurch of earth on the edge of sleep   etched into my visions food for dragonfish that learn to live upon whatever they must eat fused images beneath my pain.     II The Pearl River floods through the streets of Jackson   A Mississippi summer televised. Trapped houses kneel like sinners in the rain a white woman climbs from her roof to a passing boat   her fingers tarry for a moment on the chimney   now awash tearless and no longer young, she holds   a tattered baby's blanket in her arms. In a flickering afterimage of the nightmare rain   a microphone thrust up against her flat bewildered words           “we jest come from the bank yestiddy                      borrowing money to pay the income tax                      now everything's gone. I never knew                      it could be so hard.” Despair weighs down her voice like Pearl River mud   caked around the edges her pale eyes scanning the camera for help or explanation unanswered she shifts her search across the watered street, dry-eyed                      “hard, but not this hard.” Two tow-headed children hurl themselves against her   hanging upon her coat like mirrors until a man with ham-like hands pulls her aside   snarling “She ain't got nothing more to say!” and that lie hangs in his mouth like a shred of rotting meat.     III I inherited Jackson, Mississippi. For my majority it gave me Emmett Till   his 15 years puffed out like bruises   on plump boy-cheeks his only Mississippi summer whistling a 21 gun salute to Dixie as a white girl passed him in the street   and he was baptized my son forever   in the midnight waters of the Pearl. His broken body is the afterimage of my 21st year when I walked through a northern summer my eyes averted from each corner's photographies   newspapers protest posters magazines   Police Story, Confidential, True   the avid insistence of detail pretending insight or information the length of gash across the dead boy's loins his grieving mother's lamentation   the severed lips, how many burns   his gouged out eyes sewed shut upon the screaming covers   louder than life all over the veiled warning, the secret relish   of a black child's mutilated body   fingered by street-corner eyes   bruise upon livid bruise and wherever I looked that summer I learned to be at home with children's blood with savored violence with pictures of black broken flesh   used, crumpled, and discarded   lying amid the sidewalk refuse   like a raped woman's face. A black boy from Chicago whistled on the streets of Jackson, Mississippi testing what he'd been taught was a manly thing to do his teachers ripped his eyes out his sex his tongue and flung him to the Pearl weighted with stone in the name of white womanhood they took their aroused honor back to Jackson and celebrated in a whorehouse the double ritual of white manhood confirmed.     IV     “If earth and air and water do not judge them who are       we to refuse a crust of bread?”***
Moon marked and touched by sun   my magic is unwritten but when the sea turns back it will leave my shape behind.   I seek no favor untouched by blood unrelenting as the curse of love   permanent as my errors or my pride I do not mix love with pity nor hate with scorn and if you would know me look into the entrails of Uranus   where the restless oceans pound. I do not dwell within my birth nor my divinities   who am ageless and half-grown   and still seeking my sisters witches in Dahomey wear me inside their coiled cloths   as our mother did mourning. I have been woman for a long time beware my smile I am treacherous with old magic   and the noon's new fury with all your wide futures   promised I am woman and not white.
***
When the medication she was taking caused tiny vessels in her face to break, leaving faint but permanent blue stitches in her cheeks,   my sister said she knew she would never be beautiful again. After all those years of watching her reflection in the mirror,   sucking in her stomach and standing straight,   she said it was a relief, being done with beauty, but I could see her pause inside that moment   as the knowledge spread across her face   with a fine distress, sucking the peach out of her lips, making her cute nose seem, for the first time,   a little knobby. I’m probably the only one in the whole world   who actually remembers the year in high school   she perfected the art of being a dumb blond, spending recess on the breezeway by the physics lab,   tossing her hair and laughing that canary trill   which was her specialty, while some football player named Johnny   with a pained expression in his eyes wrapped his thick finger over and over again   in the bedspring of one of those pale curls. Or how she spent the next decade of her life   auditioning a series of tall men, looking for just one with the kind of attention span she could count on. Then one day her time of prettiness   was over, done, finito, and all those other beautiful women   in the magazines and on the streets   just kept on being beautiful everywhere you looked, walking in that kind of elegant, disinterested trance in which you sense they always seem to have one hand   touching the secret place that keeps their beauty safe, inhaling and exhaling the perfume of it— It was spring. Season when the young   buttercups and daisies climb up on the   mulched bodies of their forebears   to wave their flags in the parade. My sister just stood still for thirty seconds,   amazed by what was happening, then shrugged and tossed her shaggy head   as if she was throwing something out, something she had carried a long ways, but had no use for anymore, now that it had no use for her. That, too, was beautiful.
***
The northern lights.         I wouldn’t have noticed them     if the deer hadn’t told me     a doe         her coat of pearls         her glowing hoofs                       proud and inquisitive                       eager for my appraisal and I went out into the night with electrical steps     but with my head held also proud                       to share the animal’s fear                       and see what I had seen before     a sky flaring and spectral                       greenish waves and ribbons and the snow         under strange light         tossing in the pasture     like a storming ocean caught                       by a flaring beacon.     The deer stands away from me         not far                       there among bare black apple trees                       a presence I no longer see.     We are proud to be afraid                       proud to share the silent magnetic storm that destroys the stars                       and flickers around our heads     like the saints’ cold spiritual agonies                       of old. I remember         but without the sense         other light-storms     cold memories discursive and philosophical                       in my mind’s burden     and the deer remembers nothing. We move our feet         crunching bitter snow         while the storm     crashes like god-wars down the east                       we shake the sparks from our eyes     we quiver inside our shocked fur                       we search for each other     in the apple thicket—                       a glimpse, an acknowledgment     it is enough and never enough— we toss our heads         and say good night     moving away on bitter bitter snow.
***
There are so many roots to the tree of anger    that sometimes the branches shatter    before they bear. Sitting in Nedicks the women rally before they march    discussing the problematic girls    they hire to make them free. An almost white counterman passes    a waiting brother to serve them first    and the ladies neither notice nor reject    the slighter pleasures of their slavery.    But I who am bound by my mirror    as well as my bed see causes in colour as well as sex and sit here wondering    which me will survive    all these liberations.
***
The edge of our bed was a wide grid where your fifteen-year-old daughter was hanging   gut-sprung on police wheels a cablegram nailed to the wood next to a map of the Western Reserve I could not return with you to bury the body   reconstruct your nightly cardboards against the seeping Transvaal cold I could not plant the other limpet mine against a wall at the railroad station nor carry either of your souls back from the river   in a calabash upon my head so I bought you a ticket to Durban on my American Express and we lay together in the first light of a new season. Now clearing roughage from my autumn garden   cow sorrel    overgrown rocket gone to seed   I reach for the taste of today the New York Times finally mentions your country   a half-page story of the first white south african killed in the “unrest” Not of Black children massacred at Sebokeng   six-year-olds imprisoned for threatening the state   not of Thabo Sibeko, first grader, in his own blood   on his grandmother’s parlor floor Joyce, nine, trying to crawl to him shitting through her navel not of a three-week-old infant, nameless   lost under the burned beds of Tembisa my hand comes down like a brown vise over the marigolds   reckless through despair we were two Black women touching our flame   and we left our dead behind us I hovered    you rose    the last ritual of healing   “It is spring,” you whispered “I sold the ticket for guns and sulfa   I leave for home tomorrow” and wherever I touch you I lick cold from my fingers taste rage like salt from the lips of a woman   who has killed too often to forget   and carries each death in her eyes   your mouth a parting orchid   “Someday you will come to my country   and we will fight side by side?” Keys jingle in the door ajar    threatening   whatever is coming belongs here I reach for your sweetness but silence explodes like a pregnant belly   into my face a vomit of nevers. Mmanthatisi turns away from the cloth her daughters-in-law are dyeing the baby drools milk from her breast she hands him half-asleep to his sister dresses again for war   knowing the men will follow. In the intricate Maseru twilights quick    sad    vital she maps the next day’s battle dreams of Durban    sometimes visions the deep wry song of beach pebbles running after the sea.
***
Cold wind comes out of the white hills and rubs itself against the walls of the condominium   with an esophogeal vowel sound, and a loneliness creeps into the conversation by the hot tub. We don’t deserve pleasure just as we don’t deserve pain, but it’s pure sorcery the way the feathers of warm mist   keep rising from the surface of the water to wrap themselves around a sculpted clavicle or wrist. It’s not just that we are on the eighth story of the world looking out through glass and steel with a clarity of vision in which imported coffee and a knowledge of French painting                                               are combined, but that we are atop a pyramid of all the facts that make this possible:   the furnace that heats the water,   the truck that hauled the fuel, the artery of highway blasted through the mountains, the heart attack of the previous owner,   the history of Western medicine   that failed to save him, the successful development of tourism, the snow white lotions that counteract the chemistry   of chlorine upon skin—our skin. Down inside history’s body, the slaves are still singing in the dark;   the roads continue to be built; the wind blows and the building grips itself   in anticipation of the next strong gust. So an enormous act of forgetting is required   simply to kiss someone or to open your mouth for the fork of high-calorie paté someone is raising to your lips, which, considering the price,   it would be a sin   not to enjoy.
***
Somewhere, someone is asking a question, and I stand squinting at the classroom with one hand cupped behind my ear, trying to figure out where that voice is coming from. I might be already an old man, attempting to recall the night his hearing got misplaced, front-row-center at a battle of the bands, where a lot of leather-clad, second-rate musicians,   amped up to dinosaur proportions, test drove their equipment through our ears.   Each time the drummer threw a tantrum, the guitarist whirled and sprayed us with machine-gun riffs,   as if they wished that they could knock us quite literally dead. We called that fun in 1970, when we weren’t sure our lives were worth surviving. I’m here to tell you that they were,   and many of us did, despite ourselves,   though the road from there to here is paved with dead brain cells, parents shocked to silence, and squad cars painting the whole neighborhood   the quaking tint and texture of red jelly. Friends, we should have postmarks on our foreheads   to show where we have been; we should have pointed ears, or polka-dotted skin   to show what we were thinking when we hot-rodded over God’s front lawn,   and Death kept blinking. But here I stand, an average-looking man   staring at a room where someone blond in braids   with a beautiful belief in answers   is still asking questions. Through the silence in my dead ear,   I can almost hear the future whisper   to the past: it says that this is not a test   and everybody passes.
***
I have carried my pillow to the windowsill And try to sleep, with my damp arms crossed upon it,  But no breeze stirs the tepid morning. Only I stir ... Come, tease me a little! With such cold passion, so little teasing play, How long can we endure our life together? No use. I put on your long dressing-gown; The untied sash trails over the dusty floor. I kneel by the window, prop up your shaving mirror  And pluck my eyebrows. I don’t care if the robe slides open Revealing a crescent of belly, a tan thigh. I can accuse that nonexistent breeze ... I am as monogamous as the North Star, But I don’t want you to know it. You’d only take advantage.  While you are as fickle as spring sunlight. All right, sleep! The cat means more to you than I.  I can rouse you, but then you swagger out. I glimpse you from the window, striding toward the river. When you return, reeking of fish and beer, There is salt dew in your hair. Where have you been? Your clothes weren’t that wrinkled hours ago, when you left.  You couldn’t have loved someone else, after loving me! I sulk and sigh, dawdling by the window.  Later, when you hold me in your arms It seems, for a moment, the river ceases flowing.
***
When a beautiful woman wakes up, she checks to see if her beauty is still there.   When a sick person wakes up, he checks to see if he continues to be sick. He takes the first pills in a thirty-pill day,   looks out the window at a sky where a time-release sun is crawling   through the milky X ray of a cloud.    * * * * * I sing the body like a burnt-out fuse box,   the wires crossed, the panel lit by red malfunction lights, the pistons firing   out of sequence, the warning sirens blatting in the empty halls, and the hero is trapped in a traffic jam,   the message doesn’t reach its destination,   the angel falls down into the body of a dog   and is speechless, tearing at itself with fast white teeth;   and the consciousness twists evasively,   like a sheet of paper,        traveled by blue tongues of flame.    * * * * * In the famous painting, the saint   looks steadfastly heavenward,              away from the physical indignity below, the fascinating spectacle     of his own body                      bristling with arrows; he looks up as if he were already adamantly elsewhere,       exerting that power of denial          the soul is famous for, that ability to say, “None of this is real: Nothing that happened here on earth and who I thought I was, and nothing that I did or that was done to me,   was ever real.”
***
Fear. Three bears are not fear, mother and cubs come berrying  in our neighborhood like any other family. I want to see them, or any  distraction. Flashlight  poking across the brook into briary darkness,  but they have gone, noisily. I go to bed.  Fear. Unwritten books already titled. Some idiot will shoot the bears soon, it always happens, they’ll be strung up by the paws in someone’s frontyard  maple to be admired and  measured, and I'll be paid  for work yet to be done— with a broken imagination.  At last I dream. Our plum tree, little, black,  twisted, gaunt in the orchard: how for a moment  last spring it flowered serenely, translucently before yielding its usual summer crop of withered  leaves. I waken, late,  go to the window, look  down to the orchard. Is middle age what makes  even dreams factual? The plum is serene and  bright in new moonlight, dressed in silver leaves, and nearby, in the waste of rough grass strewn in moonlight like diamond dust, what is it?—a dark shape  moves, and then another.  Are they ... I can’t be sure. The dark house nuzzles my knee mutely,  pleading for meaty dollars.  Fear. Wouldn’t it be great  to write nothing at all except poems about bears? 
***
Then one of the students with blue hair and a tongue stud   Says that America is for him a maximum-security prison Whose walls are made of RadioShacks and Burger Kings, and MTV episodes   Where you can’t tell the show from the commercials, And as I consider how to express how full of shit I think he is,   He says that even when he’s driving to the mall in his Isuzu Trooper with a gang of his friends, letting rap music pour over them   Like a boiling Jacuzzi full of ballpeen hammers, even then he feels Buried alive, captured and suffocated in the folds   Of the thick satin quilt of America And I wonder if this is a legitimate category of pain,   or whether he is just spin doctoring a better grade, And then I remember that when I stabbed my father in the dream last night,   It was not blood but money That gushed out of him, bright green hundred-dollar bills   Spilling from his wounds, and—this is the weird part—, He gasped “Thank god—those Ben Franklins were   Clogging up my heart— And so I perish happily, Freed from that which kept me from my liberty”— Which was when I knew it was a dream, since my dad   Would never speak in rhymed couplets, And I look at the student with his acne and cell phone and phony ghetto clothes And I think, “I am asleep in America too, And I don’t know how to wake myself either,” And I remember what Marx said near the end of his life: “I was listening to the cries of the past, When I should have been listening to the cries of the future.” But how could he have imagined 100 channels of 24-hour cable Or what kind of nightmare it might be When each day you watch rivers of bright merchandise run past you And you are floating in your pleasure boat upon this river Even while others are drowning underneath you And you see their faces twisting in the surface of the waters And yet it seems to be your own hand Which turns the volume higher?
***
Windy today and I feel less than brilliant, driving over the hills from work. There are the dark parts on the road                      when you pass through clumps of wood   and the bright spots where you have a view of the ocean,   but that doesn’t make the road an allegory. I should call Marie and apologize for being so boring at dinner last night, but can I really promise not to be that way again?   And anyway, I’d rather watch the trees, tossing   in what certainly looks like sexual arousal. Otherwise it’s spring, and everything looks frail; the sky is baby blue, and the just-unfurling leaves are full of infant chlorophyll,   the very tint of inexperience. Last summer’s song is making a comeback on the radio,   and on the highway overpass, the only metaphysical vandal in America has written   MEMORY LOVES TIME in big black spraypaint letters, which makes us wonder if Time loves Memory back. Last night I dreamed of X again. She’s like a stain on my subconscious sheets.   Years ago she penetrated me but though I scrubbed and scrubbed and scrubbed,   I never got her out, but now I’m glad. What I thought was an end turned out to be a middle.   What I thought was a brick wall turned out to be a tunnel.   What I thought was an injustice turned out to be a color of the sky. Outside the youth center, between the liquor store   and the police station, a little dogwood tree is losing its mind; overflowing with blossomfoam,   like a sudsy mug of beer; like a bride ripping off her clothes, dropping snow white petals to the ground in clouds, so Nature’s wastefulness seems quietly obscene.   It’s been doing that all week: making beauty, and throwing it away, and making more.
***
          ONE From Sappho to myself, consider the fate of women. How unwomanly to discuss it! Like a noose or an albatross necktie   The clinical sobriquet hangs us: codpiece coveters. Never mind these epithets; I myself have collected some honeys.   Juvenal set us apart in denouncing our vices Which had grown, in part, from having been set apart: Women abused their spouses, cuckolded them, even plotted   To poison them. Sensing, behind the violence of his manner— “Think I'm crazy or drunk?”—his emotional stake in us,   As we forgive Strindberg and Nietzsche, we forgive all those   Who cannot forget us. We are hyenas. Yes, we admit it. While men have politely debated free will, we have howled for it,   Howl still, pacing the centuries, tragedy heroines. Some who sat quietly in the corner with their embroidery Were Defarges, stabbing the wool with the names of their ancient   Oppressors, who ruled by the divine right of the male— I’m impatient of interruptions! I’m aware there were millions   Of mutes for every Saint Joan or sainted Jane Austen, Who, vague-eyed and acquiescent, worshiped God as a man.   I’m not concerned with those cabbageheads, not truly feminine   But neutered by labor. I mean real women, like you and like me. Freed in fact, not in custom, lifted from furrow and scullery,   Not obliged, now, to be the pot for the annual chicken,   Have we begun to arrive in time? With our well-known   Respect for life because it hurts so much to come out with it;   Disdainful of “sovereignty,” “national honor;” and other abstractions; We can say, like the ancient Chinese to successive waves of invaders,   “Relax, and let us absorb you. You can learn temperance   In a more temperate climate.” Give us just a few decades   Of grace, to encourage the fine art of acquiescence   And we might save the race. Meanwhile, observe our creative chaos,   Flux, efflorescence—whatever you care to call it!          TWO I take as my theme “The Independent Woman,” Independent but maimed: observe the exigent neckties   Choking violet writers; the sad slacks of stipple-faced matrons;   Indigo intellectuals, crop-haired and callus-toed, Cute spectacles, chewed cuticles, aced out by full-time beauties   In the race for a male. Retreating to drabness, bad manners,   And sleeping with manuscripts. Forgive our transgressions   Of old gallantries as we hitch in chairs, light our own cigarettes,   Not expecting your care, having forfeited it by trying to get even. But we need dependency, cosseting, and well-treatment.   So do men sometimes. Why don’t they admit it?   We will be cows for a while, because babies howl for us,   Be kittens or bitches, who want to eat grass now and then   For the sake of our health. But the role of pastoral heroine   Is not permanent, Jack. We want to get back to the meeting. Knitting booties and brows, tartars or termagants, ancient   Fertility symbols, chained to our cycle, released Only in part by devices of hygiene and personal daintiness,   Strapped into our girdles, held down, yet uplifted by man’s   Ingenious constructions, holding coiffures in a breeze,   Hobbled and swathed in whimsy, tripping on feminine   Shoes with fool heels, losing our lipsticks, you, me, In ephemeral stockings, clutching our handbags and packages. Our masks, always in peril of smearing or cracking, In need of continuous check in the mirror or silverware,   Keep us in thrall to ourselves, concerned with our surfaces.   Look at man’s uniform drabness, his impersonal envelope!   Over chicken wrists or meek shoulders, a formal, hard-fibered assurance.   The drape of the male is designed to achieve self-forgetfulness. So, Sister, forget yourself a few times and see where it gets you:   Up the creek, alone with your talent, sans everything else. You can wait for the menopause, and catch up on your reading.   So primp, preen, prink, pluck, and prize your flesh, All posturings! All ravishment! All sensibility! Meanwhile, have you used your mind today? What pomegranate raised you from the dead, Springing, full-grown, from your own head, Athena?          THREE          I will speak about women of letters, for I’m in the racket.   Our biggest successes to date? Old maids to a woman. And our saddest conspicuous failures? The married spinsters   On loan to the husbands they treated like surrogate fathers.   Think of that crew of self-pitiers, not-very-distant, Who carried the torch for themselves and got first-degree burns.   Or the sad sonneteers, toast-and-teasdales we loved at thirteen;   Middle-aged virgins seducing the puerile anthologists   Through lust-of-the-mind; barbiturate-drenched Camilles   With continuous periods, murmuring softly on sofas   When poetry wasn’t a craft but a sickly effluvium,   The air thick with incense, musk, and emotional blackmail. I suppose they reacted from an earlier womanly modesty   When too many girls were scabs to their stricken sisterhood,   Impugning our sex to stay in good with the men, Commencing their insecure bluster. How they must have swaggered   When women themselves endorsed their own inferiority!   Vestals, vassals, and vessels, rolled into several, They took notes in rolling syllabics, in careful journals,   Aiming to please a posterity that despises them. But we’ll always have traitors who swear that a woman surrenders   Her Supreme Function, by equating Art with aggression   And failure with Femininity. Still, it’s just as unfair To equate Art with Femininity, like a prettily packaged commodity   When we are the custodians of the world’s best-kept secret:   Merely the private lives of one-half of humanity. But even with masculine dominance, we mares and mistresses   Produced some sleek saboteuses, making their cracks Which the porridge-brained males of the day were too thick to perceive, Mistaking young hornets for perfectly harmless bumblebees. Being thought innocuous rouses some women to frenzy;   They try to be ugly by aping the ways of men And succeed. Swearing, sucking cigars and scorching the bedspread, Slopping straight shots, eyes blotted, vanity-blown In the expectation of glory: she writes like a man! This drives other women mad in a mist of chiffon. (One poetess draped her gauze over red flannels, a practical feminist.) But we’re emerging from all that, more or less, Except for some ladylike laggards and Quarterly priestesses   Who flog men for fun, and kick women to maim competition.   Now, if we struggle abnormally, we may almost seem normal; If we submerge our self-pity in disciplined industry; If we stand up and be hated, and swear not to sleep with editors; If we regard ourselves formally, respecting our true limitations   Without making an unseemly show of trying to unfreeze our assets;   Keeping our heads and our pride while remaining unmarried;   And if wedded, kill guilt in its tracks when we stack up the dishes And defect to the typewriter. And if mothers, believe in the luck of our children, Whom we forbid to devour us, whom we shall not devour, And the luck of our husbands and lovers, who keep free women.
***
We don’t lack people here on the Northern coast, But they are people one meets, not people one cares for.  So I bundle my daughters into the car And with my brother poets, go to visit you, brother. Here come your guests! A swarm of strangers and children; But the strangers write verses, the children are daughters like yours.  We bed down on mattresses, cots, roll up on the floor: Outside, burly old fruit trees in mist and rain; In every room, bundles asleep like larvae. We waken and count our daughters. Otherwise, nothing happens.  You feed them sweet rolls and melon, drive them all to the zoo;  Patiently, patiently, ever the father, you answer their questions.  Later, we eat again, drink, listen to poems. Nothing occurs, though we are aware you have three daughters  Who last year had four. But even death becomes part of our ease:  Poems, parenthood, sorrow, all we have learned From these of tenderness, holds us together In the center of life, entertaining daughters By firelight, with cake and songs. You, my brother, are a good and violent drinker,  Good at reciting short-line or long-line poems.  In time we will lose all our daughters, you and I, Be temperate, venerable, content to stay in one place,  Sending our messages over the mountains and waters.
***
I sing of Morrisville  (if you call this cry       a song). I (if you call this painful voice by that great name)  sing the poverty of my       region and of the wrong end of Morrisville. You summer people will say  that all its ends are wrong,        but there, right there, the very end of the wrong end— a house with windows sagging,  leaning roadward as in defense        or maybe defiance next to the granite ledge, our cliff of broken stone that shoulders our dilapidated         one-lane iron bridge.  Who lives here? I don’t know. But they (Hermes reward them)  made this extraordinary garden,          geraniums, petunias and nasturtiums planted in every crevice and all  the footholds of the cliff.         And then they painted the cliff-face, painted the old stone; no design,  just swatches of color, bold         rough splashes  irregularly, garish orange and livid blue. Is it fluorescent, do these stones          glow in the dark? Maybe. I only know they glow in the day, so  vivid I stopped my car,         whereupon two others  came inquiring also, two crows in the broken spars of the white pine tree, cawing          above the house. Why had those who inhabited this corner of poverty painted the stones? Was it          that the flowers in living bravery nevertheless made too meager a show for the ruined cliff? Or did they          think to bring art to nature, somehow to improve this corner of ugliness? For my part I thought how          these colors were beautiful and yet strange in their beauty, ugly colors,  garish orange, livid blue;          they reminded me of those Spanish cemeteries I saw in New Mexico, tin  mirrors and plastic flowers          in the desert. Then I knew why the stones had been painted: to make  reparation, such as the poor       might make, whose sorrow  had been done here, this desecration. Is not this the burden of all poor lands          everywhere, the basis of poverty? A spoiled land makes spoiled  people. The poor know this.          I guess the crows know too, because off they flew, cawing above the bridge and the slashed hills          surrounding Morrisville.  I started my car and drove out on the iron bridge  which rumbled its sullen          affirmation. And I sang as I sing now (if you care to call it song)  my people of Morrisville          who live where all the ends are wrong. 
***
My mother—preferring the strange to the tame: Dove-note, bone marrow, deer dung, Frog’s belly distended with finny young, Leaf-mold wilderness, harebell, toadstool, Odd, small snakes roving through the leaves, Metallic beetles rambling over stones: all Wild and natural!—flashed out her instinctive love, and quick, she   Picked up the fluttering, bleeding bat the cat laid at her feet,   And held the little horror to the mirror, where He gazed on himself, and shrieked like an old screen door far off. Depended from her pinched thumb, each wing Came clattering down like a small black shutter. Still tranquil, she began, “It’s rather sweet ...” The soft mouse body, the hard feral glint In the caught eyes. Then we saw, And recoiled: lice, pallid, yellow, Nested within the wing-pits, cozily sucked and snoozed.   The thing dropped from her hands, and with its thud, Swiftly, the cat, with a clean careful mouth Closed on the soiled webs, growling, took them out to the back stoop. But still, dark blood, a sticky puddle on the floor   Remained, of all my mother’s tender, wounding passion   For a whole wild, lost, betrayed, and secret life   Among its dens and burrows, its clean stones,   Whose denizens can turn upon the world   With spitting tongue, an odor, talon, claw,   To sting or soil benevolence, alien As our clumsy traps, our random scatter of shot.   She swept to the kitchen. Turning on the tap,   She washed and washed the pity from her hands.
***
In the laboratory waiting room containing one television actor with a teary face trying a contact lens; two muscular victims of industrial accidents;   several vain women—I was one of them—   came Deborah, four, to pick up her glass eye. It was a long day: Deborah waiting for the blood vessels painted on her iris to dry. Her mother said that, holding Deborah when she was born, “First I inspected her, from toes to navel, then stopped at her head ...” We wondered why the inspection hadn’t gone the other way.   “Looking into her eye was like looking into a volcano: “Her vacant pupil went whirling down, down to the foundation   of the world ... When she was three months old they took it out.   She giggled when she went under the anaesthetic. Forty-five minutes later she came back happy! ... The gas wore off, she found the hole in her face (you know, it never bled?), stayed happy, even when I went to pieces.   She’s five, in June. “Deborah, you get right down from there, or I’ll have to slap!” Laughing, Deborah climbed into the lap of one vain lady, who had been discontented with her own beauty.   Now she held on to Deborah, looked her steadily   in the empty eye.
***
The florist was told, cyclamen or azalea;  White in either case, for you are pale As they are, “blooming early and profusely” Though the azalea grows in sandier soil,  Needing less care; while cyclamen’s fleshy tubers  Are adored, yes, rooted out by some.  One flourishes in aridness, while the other  Feeds the love which devours. But what has flung you here for salvaging  From a city’s dereliction, this New York? A world against whose finger-and-breath-marked windows  These weak flares may be set. Our only bulwark is the frailest cover:  Lovers touch from terror of being alone.  The urban surface: tough and granular,  Poor ground for the affections to take root. Left to our own devices, we devise Such curious deaths, comas, or mutilations!  You may buy peace, white, in sugary tincture,  No way of knowing its strength, or your own,  Until you lie quite still, your perfect limbs  In meditation: the spirit rouses, flutters Like a handkerchief at a cell window, signaling,  Self-amazed, its willingness to endure. The thing to cling to is the sense of expectation.  Who knows what may occur in the next breath?  In the pallor of another morning we neither  Anticipated nor wanted! Eve, waken to flowers  Unforeseen, from someone you don’t even know.  Azalea or cyclamen ... we live in wonder, Blaze in a cycle of passion and apprehension  Though once we lay and waited for a death.
***
I just had the old Dodge in the shop with that same damned front-end problem,   and I was out, so to speak, for a test run, loafing along, maybe 35 m.p.h.,   down the old Corvallis road, holding her out of the ruts and potholes. That’s out in Montana, the Bitterroot Valley.   Long ways from home is how they say it. Long ways from home, boys, long long ways from home. Might as well not put this clunker in the shop   and keep my hard-earned in my pocket,   she wobbles and humps like a scared rabbit. But it’s a real fine summer day in Corvallis,   and I’m loafing along watching the sprayers   do their slow drag on the fields of alfalfa, and I come to a side road with a little green sign   says “Kurtz Lane” and I said to myself out loud,   “Mistah Kurtz—he alive. Him doing just fine,” because of the sign, you see, and because I’m lonesome   and maybe kind of bitter in spite of the sunshine.   It’s still a goddamn long ways from home. That’s one thing, though, that Heart of Darkness,   I read that story every year, I never forget   that crazy old son-of-a-bitch, that Kurtz. And the next thing I see about a quarter-mile   down the road is somebody small on the shoulder,   a kid looking for a ride home, I figure. And he’s a kid all right, maybe ten or eleven,   but no Montana boy, he’s an Oriental,   one of those Laotians that got resettled. Can’t figure why they brought them to Montana.   He’s got those big eyes and caved-in cheeks   like the pictures on the TV during Vietnam, and his mouth is open a little. I say to myself,   I’ll give him a ride if he wants, and I even   begin to slow down, but he didn’t put up his thumb. Just when I went by, he waved,   real quick and shy, but still like he was trying   to reach me. I drove on. Then I bust out crying. 
***
At Samoa, hardly unpacked, I commenced planting, When I’d opened the chicken crates, built the Cochins a coop.   The Reverend Mr. Claxton called, found me covered with mud,   My clothes torn, my hair in a wad, my bare feet bleeding.   I had started the buffalo grass in the new-made clearing.   The next day the priest paid a visit. Civil but restless,   I was dying to plant the alfalfa seed—gave him a packet. That evening I paced up and down, dropping melon seeds,   Tomatoes and bush lima beans here and there Where I thought they would grow. We were short of food now,   So I cooked up a mess of fat little parrots, disturbed   At the way they suggested cages and swings and stands ...   An excellent meal. I have been told the dodo survived here,   And yearn for a pet on a string. And I built the pig-house. I had brought sweet coconut seed from Savage Island.   I planted kidney potatoes in small earthen hills.   Sowed seeds of eggplant in numerous boxes of soil,   Tomato and artichoke too; half-a-dozen fine pineapple   Sent over by Mr. Carruthers, the island solicitor.   As fast as we eat them, we plant the tops. The kitchen a shack near the house. I made bread in the rain. October, 1890. I have been here nearly a month; Put in corn, peas, onions, radishes, lettuce. Lima beans Are already coming up. The ripening cantaloupe were stolen.   Carruthers gave me mint root and grenadilla Like a bouquet; he delivered a load of trees, Two mangoes among them. I set them out in a heavy rain,   Then rounded off the afternoon sowing Indian corn. Louis has called me a peasant. How I brooded!   Confided it to you, diary, then crossed it out.   Peasant because I delve in the earth, the earth I own.   Confiding my seed and root—I too a creator?   My heart melts over a bed of young peas. A blossom   On the rose tree is like a poem by my son.   My hurt healed by its cause, I go on planting. No one else works much. The natives take it easy; The colonials keep their shops, and a shortage of customers.   The mail comes four times a month, and the gossip all day.   The bars are crowded with amateur politicians,   Office-seekers I named the earwig consul and king:   Big talkers, with small-time conspirators drinking them in.   Mr. Carruthers and I picked a site for the kitchen garden. I was planting a new lot of corn and pumpkin When a young chief arrived, laden with pineapple plants.   I set them out as I talked to him on the way home. Rats and a wild hen ate the corn. Lettuce got too much sun.   So I dug a new patch up the road; in the fragrant evening   I confided to Louis, a puff of the sweetest scent Blows back as I cast away a handful of so-called weeds! It still hurts, his remark that I have the soul of a peasant.   My vanity, like a newly felled tree, lies prone and bleeding.   I clear the weeds near the house for planting maize.   Sweet corn and peas are showing. I send for more seeds.   I clean out the potatoes, which had rotted in their hills. Of course, RLS is not idle; he is writing A Footnote to History: How the great powers combine to carve up these islands. I discovered the ylang-ylang tree: a base for perfume, Though it suggested to me the odor of boots. Another tree is scented like pepper and spice, And one terrible tree, I am forced to say, Smells like ordure ... It nearly made me ill. Breadfruit is plentiful. I found a banana grove, Began clearing it instantly, and worked till I was dizzy. The garden looks like a graveyard: beds shaped like tombs. I plant cabbage which I loathe, so the British won’t tease me   For not growing it. But behold! in the hedge Among citron and lime, many lemon trees, in full bearing.   Still, I will fall to brooding before the mirror, Though Louis says he finds the peasant class “interesting.” He is forty today. I am ten years his senior. On the cleared land, the green mummy-apple, Male and female, is springing up everywhere. I discover wild ginger, turmeric, something like sugar.   Roots of orange, breadfruit and mango, seeds of cacao   Came with a shipment from Sydney; also eleven Young navel orange trees. The strawberry plants are rotten.   I am given a handful of bees. I plant more pineapple.   All fall I am cursed with asthma, rheumatics, a painful ear. Christmas. A hurricane. And the New Year begins.   Louis describes it divinely to Henry James. Mr. Carruthers’ gift pineapple starts to fruit. I set out one precious rhubarb plant, pause to gloat At the ripe tomatoes, the flourishing long-podded beans.   But the neighbors’ horses break in and trample the corn.   Sometimes, when planting, a strange subterranean rumble   —Volcanic?—vexes the earth beneath this peasant haunch. I rise up from my furrow, knuckle smooth my brow As I sniff the air, suddenly chemical, a sulphurous fume.   Louis insisted on going to Sydney, fell ill again. His mother comes back with him, finds me on my knees.   The old lady’s heart leaps! Alas, I am planting, not praying. We both rise at five-thirty, after dreaming of weeds.   Louis describes to me endless vivid deeps: Dreams of nettle-stings, stabs from the citron’s thorns,   The ants’ fiery bites, the resistance of mud and slime,   The evasions of wormy roots, the dead weight of heat   In the sudden puffs of air ... Louis writes till nine,   Then if he’s well enough, he helps with the weeding. He writes Colvin, keeper of prints at the British Museum,   “I know pleasure still ... with a thousand faces, None perfect, a thousand tongues, all broken, A thousand hands, all with scratching nails ... High among joys, I place this delight of weeding, Out here alone by the garrulous water, under the silence   Of the high wind, broken by sounds of birds.” The shock of bird-calls, laughing and whistling!   They mimic his name till it seems, he says, “The birds re-live the business of my day.” But the rain continues to fall on birds and weeds. The new servants fooled around with the ice machine   As the house leaked and listed. Mildew spread its failure.   Mrs. S. gave me some nuts, and went back to Australia. Green peppers, eggplant, tomatoes are flourishing,   Asparagus also. The celery does to season soup.   Avocados grow at a rate that is almost frightening. Coconuts too. I read about Stanley and Livingstone. I cured my five ulcers with calomel, wished I could tell   Stanley the remedy. Instead, I made perfume. The servants feared devils, so I planted the orange grove alone. For two months I misplaced this diary ... War is in the air, talk of killing all whites. I bought coffee trees, rose trees, and Indian beans,   Then went to Fiji to rest, and to get more seeds   From a former Kew gardener. An Indian in a shop   Told me how to raise Persian melon and cauliflower   And a radish that turns into a turnip when it grows up. I came home to a burgeoning world: cacao, custard squash.   The new house was finished, and painted peacock blue.   The jealous old cat bit off the new cat’s toes. My mother-in-law returned with her Bible and lady’s maid;   My daughter, her family, and my son Lloyd came too.   The relatives had a terrible row. Mrs. S. refused To pray with the servants. I threw up my hands! My diary entries grow farther and farther apart. I wrote life was a strain. Later, someone crossed it out.   In pain again, from an aneurysm inside my head ... I planted more and more cacao, and a form of cherry tree,   Tobacco and rubber, taught how by Mr. Sketchley.   I planted more cacao through an epidemic of ’flu. Three hundred seeds in baskets broke through the ground. I get almost no time to write. I have been planting ...   Four kinds of cabbage are doing very well. Mr. Haggard, the land commissioner, come to dine,   Points out a weed which makes excellent eating Cooked like asparagus. I shall try it very soon. Now, when the Reverend Mr. Claxton comes to call,   I refuse to see him. I am tired of the Claxtons. The political situation grows grim. I rage at Louis Who toasts, “Her Blessed Majesty the Queen,” then aggressively   Throbbing, turns to my American son To say he may drink to the President afterward If he likes. I am writing this down Hoping Louis will see it later, and be ashamed Of his childishness and bad taste. (This will be erased.) Because war is near, the Germans stop growing cacao.   Captain Hufnagel offers me all the seeds I can use.   So now we are blazing with cacao fever, The whole family infected. Six hundred plants set out!   The verandah tracked with mud, and the cacao litter. Mrs. S. upset by the mess. Twelve hundred cacaos planted.   Joe, my son-in-law, planted his thousandth tree today. The tree onions make large bulbs but don’t want to seed.   Most vigorous: sunflower, watermelon—weeds! The jelly from berries out of the bush is delicious; Lovely perfume from massoi, citron, vanilla, and gum.   The peanuts are weeded while Joe plays on his flute.   I plant cabbage by moonlight, set out more cacao. The heart of a death’s-head moth beats a tattoo in my hand. Planted coffee all day, and breadfruit, five beauties ...   Planted coffee the better part of the day, eight plants.   In the nursery, three times that many. Planted coffee ...   Painted the storm shutters. Planted coffee all morning.   I found a heap of old bones in a bush near the sty; Two heads and a body: a warrior died with his prize.   Louis gave the bones a funeral and a burial. A series of hurricanes: Louis writes to The Times Of “the foul colonial politics.” I send to New York for seeds:   Southern Cross cabbage, eggplant, sweet potato And two thousand custard apples. Louis’ own seed,   David Balfour, is growing. I wrote nothing From June till the end of this year; too busy planting.   The Samoan princes are getting nearer to war. It pains me to write this: my son-in-law has gone native   In a spectacular way. Belle is divorcing him. Austin, my grandson, is in school in Monterey. I have not, I believe, mentioned Mrs. Stevenson recently.   She has gone back to Scotland. The first breadfruit bore.   Belle and I go on sketching expeditions To the hostile Samoan camps, stop in town for ginger beer. Mr. Haggard begged us to stay in town Because he bitterly wanted women to protect. I suggested to him that I and my daughter Could hide under his table and hand him cartridges   At the window, to complete the romantic effect.   It is clear that Mr. Haggard is Ryder’s brother! He said, “You’d sell your life for a bunch of banana trees.” I’ve given permission to most of the “boys” To go to the races. Lloyd has put up the lawn tennis things.   Mr. Gurr, the neighbor, rushes in to say war has begun.   We all race to the mission. Eleven heads have been taken.   Later: Mr. Dine’s cousin received a head smeared with black   (The custom is to return them to the bereaved). He washed it off and discovered it was his brother. He sat there, holding his brother’s head in his hands, Kissing it, bathing it with his tears. A scandal arose Because the heads of three girls have been taken as well (Unheard of before in Samoa), returned wrapped in silk to their kin. At Malie, the warriors danced a head-hunter’s pantomime;   The men who had taken heads carried great lumps of raw pork   Between their teeth, cut in the semblance of heads. I stopped writing this. Too hysterical with migraine. Also, people find where I hide it, and strike things out.   Our favorite chief is exiled for life. The war winds down.   Louis works on his masterpiece, The Weir of Hermiston. Well, I’ve kept him alive for eight more years, While his dear friends would have condemned him to fog and rain   So they might enjoy his glorious talk in London, Though it be the end of him. Fine friends! except for James.   Later: At six, Louis helped with the mayonnaise, When he put both hands to his head, said, “Oh, what a pain!   Do I look strange?” I said no, not wanting to frighten him.   He was never conscious again. In two hours he died.   Tonight, the chiefs with their axes are digging a path   To the top of the mountain. They will dig his grave. I will leave here as soon as I can, and never return,   Except to be buried beside him. I will live like a gipsy   In my wild, ragged clothes, until I am old, old.   I will have pretty gardens wherever I am, But never breadfruit, custard apples, grenadilla, cacao,   Pineapple, ylang-ylang, citron, mango, cacao,   Never again succumb to the fever of planting.
***
It’s a spring morning; sun pours in the window  As I sit here drinking coffee, reading Augustine.  And finding him, as always, newly minted  From when I first encountered him in school.  Today I’m overcome with astonishment  At the way we girls denied all that was mean  In those revered philosophers we studied; Who found us loathsome, loathsomely seductive;  Irrelevant, at best, to noble discourse  Among the sex, the only sex that counted.  Wounded, we pretended not to mind it And wore tight sweaters to tease our shy professor. We sat in autumn sunshine “as the clouds arose  From slimy desires of the flesh, and from Youth’s seething spring.” Thank you, Augustine.  Attempting to seem blasé, our cheeks on fire, It didn’t occur to us to rush from the room. Instead we brushed aside “the briars of unclean desire”  And struggled on through mires of misogyny Till we arrived at Kierkegaard, and began to see That though Saint A. and Søren had much in common  Including fear and trembling before women, The Saint scared himself, while Søren was scared of us. Had we, poor girls, been flattered by their thralldom? Yes, it was always us, the rejected feminine  From whom temptation came. It was our flesh  With its deadly sweetness that led them on. Yet how could we not treasure Augustine, “Stuck fast in the bird-lime of pleasure”? That roomful of adolescent poets manqué Assuaged, bemused by music, let the meaning go.  Swept by those psalmic cadences, we were seduced!  Some of us tried for a while to be well-trained souls  And pious seekers, enmeshed in the Saint’s dialectic:  Responsible for our actions, yet utterly helpless. A sensible girl would have barked like a dog before God. We students, children still, were shocked to learn The children these men desired were younger than we!  Augustine fancied a girl about eleven, The age of Adeodatus, Augustine’s son. Søren, like Poe, eyed his girl before she was sixteen,  To impose his will on a malleable child, when She was not equipped to withstand or understand him.  Ah, the Pygmalion instinct! Mold the clay! Create the compliant doll that can only obey, Expecting to be abandoned, minute by minute.  It was then I abandoned philosophy, A minor loss, although I majored in it. But we were a group of sunny innocents.  I don’t believe we knew what evil meant. Now I live with a well-trained soul who deals with evil,  Including error, material or spiritual,  Easily, like changing a lock on the kitchen door. He prays at set times and in chosen places  (At meals, in church), while I Pray without thinking how or when to pray,  In a low mumble, several times a day,  Like running a continuous low fever; The sexual impulse for the most part being over.  Believing I believe. Not banking on it ever. It’s afternoon. I sit here drinking kir And reading Kierkegaard: “All sin begins with fear.” (True. We lie first from terror of our parents.)  In, I believe, an oblique crack at Augustine,  Søren said by denying the erotic It was brought to the attention of the world.  The rainbow curtain rises on the sensual:  Christians must admit it before they can deny it.  He reflected on his father’s fierce repression  Of the sexual, which had bent him out of shape;  Yet he had to pay obeisance to that power: He chose his father when he broke with his Regina. Søren said by denying the erotic It is brought to the attention of the world.  You must admit it before you can deny it.***
You rose from our embrace and the small light spread like an aureole around you. The long parabola of neck and shoulder, flank and thigh I saw permute itself through unfolding and unlimited minuteness in the movement of your tall tread, the spine-root swaying, the Picasso-like éclat of scissoring slender legs. I knew some law of Being was at work. At one time I had said that love bestows such values, and so it does, but the old man in his canto was right and wise: ubi amor ibi ocullus est. Always I wanted to give and in wanting was the poet. A man now, aging, I know the best of love is not to bestow, but to recognize. 
***
You died. And because you were Greek they gave you            a coin to carry under your tongue and then also  biscuits and honey. When you came to the riverbank           you saw a crazy-looking black bumboat on the water  with a figure standing in it, lanky and dressed           darkly, holding a sweep. You were taken across, and you gave your coin for the passage, and continued           until you came to a three-headed dog, who snarled  and threatened you, even though you were not trying           to escape. You gave him the biscuits smeared  with honey, and you passed onward to the field           of asphodel and through the gate of Tartarus. Or you died and you were Navajo. They had carried you           out of the hogan earlier so you’d die in the sunshine.  Or if it happened inside suddenly, they stuffed up           the smokehole and boarded the front entrance, and cut  an opening in the back, the north-facing, dark-facing           side, to carry you out, and no one ever used  that hogan again. They took off your moccasins           and put them on again wrong side to, the left one  on the right foot, the right on the left, so that your           chindi would be confused and unable to return  along your tracks. They washed your hair in suds           made from the yucca. Then they gave you  enough fried bread and water to last four days,           and you set off on your journey. But actually none of these things happened. You just died. 
***
Just over the horizon a great machine of death is roaring and rearing. We can hear it always. Earthquake, starvation, the ever-renewing sump of corpse-flesh.But in this valley the snow falls silently all day, and out our window We see the curtain of it shifting and folding, hiding us away in our little house,We see earth smoothened and beautified, made like a fantasy, the snow-clad treesSo graceful. In our new bed, which is big enough to seem like the north pasture almostWith our two cats, Cooker and Smudgins, lying undisturbed in the southeastern and southwestern corners,We lie loving and warm, looking out from time to time. “Snowbound,” we say. We speak of the poetWho lived with his young housekeeper long ago in the mountains of the western province, the kingdomOf cruelty, where heads fell like wilted flowers and snow fell for many monthsAcross the pass and drifted deep in the vale. In our kitchen the maple-fire murmursIn our stove. We eat cheese and new-made bread and jumbo Spanish olivesWhich have been steeped in our special brine of jalapeños and garlic and dill and thyme.We have a nip or two from the small inexpensive cognac that makes us smile and sigh.For a while we close the immense index of images that is our lives—for instance,The child on the Mescalero reservation in New Mexico sitting naked in 1966 outside his family’s hut,Covered with sores, unable to speak. But of course we see the child every day,We hold out our hands, we touch him shyly, we make offerings to his implacability.No, the index cannot close. And how shall we survive? We don’t and cannot and will neverKnow. Beyond the horizon a great unceasing noise is undeniable. The machine,Like an immense clanking vibrating shuddering unnameable contraption as big as a house, as big as the whole town,May break through and lurch into our valley at any moment, at any moment.Cheers, baby. Here’s to us. See how the curtain of snow wavers and then falls back.
***
Both of us had been close to Joel, and at Joel’s death my friend had gone to the wake  and the memorial service and more recently he had visited Joel’s grave, there at the back of the grassy cemetery among the trees, “a quiet, gentle place,” he said,  “befitting Joel.” And I said,  “What’s the point of going  to look at graves?” I went into one of my celebrated tirades. “People go to look  at the grave of Keats or Hart  Crane, they go traveling just to  do it, what a waste of time.  What do they find there? Hell,  I wouldn’t go look at the grave of  Shakespeare if it was just  down the street. I wouldn’t  look at—” And I stopped. I was about to say the grave of God  until I realized I’m looking at it  all the time.... 
***
To tell the truth, those brick Housing Authority buildings  For whose loveliness no soul had planned, Like random dominoes stood, worn out and facing each other,  Creating the enclosure that was our home. Long basement corridors connected one house to another  And had a special smell, from old bicycles and baby carriages  In the storage rooms. The elevators Were used by kissing teenagers. The playground—iron swingchains, fences, iron monkey bars,  Iron seesaw handles, doubtless now rusted— Left a strong iron smell on my hands and in the autumn air  And rang with cries. To me it is even precious Where they chased the local Mongoloid, yelling “Stupid Joey! Stupid Joey!” Now I’ve said everything nice I can about this. 
***
Now here is a typical children’s story  that happens in gorgeous October  when the mothers are coming in the afternoon, wearing brisk boots  and windy skirts to pick up the little children from the day care center Frost in the air the maples golden and crimson my son in a leaf pile in the playground dreaming  I am late, the playground is almost empty, my husband will kill me I gather my son to go home, he forgets his sweater in the playground and I send him back  he dawdles, he is playing with leaves in his mind, it is already a quarter to six, will you come on I say and hurry along the corridor, there are yellow and blue rocket  paintings, but I feel bad and ask what did you do today,  do you recognize this story, the way he stands and picks  his nose, move I say, do you want dinner or not  I’m going to make a nice dinner, fried chicken I wheedle, so could you please walk a little faster, okay, I walk a little faster and get upstairs  myself, pivot on boot-heel, nobody there, he is putting something in his mouth, his sable eyelashes  downcast, and I am swooping down the stairwell screaming          damn you           that’s filthy          I told you not before dinner We are climbing the stairs and I am crying, my son is not crying I have shaken him, I have pried the sweet from his cheek  I have slapped his cheek like a woman slapping a carpet  with all my strength          mothers are very strong          he is too young to do anything about this           will not remember he remembers it The mind is a leaf pile where you can bury anything, pain, the image of a woman who wears a necklace of skulls, a screaming woman  you dig quickly and deposit the pulpy thing you drop leaves on it and it stays there, that is the story that is sticking in my mind as we push the exit door, and run through the evening wind  to my car where I jerk the gearshift and pick  up a little speed, going along this neat suburban avenue full of maples the mark of my hand a blush on my son’s cheek. 
***
A linear projection: a route. It crosses The ocean in many ships. Arriving in the new  Land, it cuts through and down forests and it  Keeps moving. Terrain: Rock, weaponry.  Dark trees, mastery. Grass, to yield. Earth,  Reproachful. Fox, bear, coon, wildcat  Prowl gloomily, it kills them, it skins them,  Its language alters, no account varmint, its Teeth set, nothing defeats its obsession, it becomes  A snake in the reedy river. Spits and prays,  Keeps moving. Behind it, a steel track. Cold,  Permanent. Not permanent. It will decay. This  Does not matter, it does not actually care, Murdering the buffalo, driving the laggard regiments,  The caring was a necessary myth, an eagle like  A speck in heaven dives. The line believes  That the entire wrinkled mountain range is the  Eagle’s nest, and everything tumbles in place.  It buries its balls at Wounded Knee, it rushes  Gold, it gambles. It buys plastics. Another  Ocean stops it. Soon, soon, up by its roots,  Severed, irrecoverably torn, that does not matter,  It decides, perpendicular from here: escape. A prior circle: a mouth. It is nowhere, Everywhere, swollen, warm. Expanding and contracting  It absorbs and projects children, jungles, Black shoes, pennies, blood. It speaks Too many dark, suffering languages. Reaching a hand  Toward its throat, you disappear entirely. No Wonder you fear this bleeding pulse, no wonder. 
***
They remember the dead who died in the resistance.   It is in sweet tones that they speak of them.   They shake their heads, still, after the dinner Walking back to the car, while an evening snow   That has started windlessly, white from pearl-gray,   Falls into streets that are already slushy. They shake their heads, as we do when there is something   Too strange to believe, Or as a beast does, stunned by a blow. “To die in the resistance,”   they say, “is to fail   To turn into slush, to escape this ugliness.   It is at once to leap, a creamy swan, Upward.”   Three voices: oboe, piano, cello. The high one wishes to be pleasing, the middle   To be practical, the deep to persevere. A movie theater lobby in front of them Throws its light on the sidewalk, like a woman   Swiftly emptying a bucket of water: The flakes are falling in its yellow light.   Then they pass a café, its light red neon,   Then a closed pharmacy.                                     —They pull sharp air Into their lungs, a pain that is a pleasure.   “Try to live as if there were no God,”   They don’t say, but they mean. A recollection of purity, a clean Handkerchief each man feels in his own pocket, Perturbs them, slows their pace down. Now they have seen A yellow stain on a pile of old snow Between two parked cars, where a man has peed:   The resistance. The falling flakes, falling On the men’s hats. And now The snow grows heavier, falls on their stooping shoulders. 
***
Boil over—it’s what the nerves do,   Watch them seethe when stimulated, Murmurs the man at the stove   To the one at the fridge— Watch that electric impulse that finally makes them   Fume and fizz at either Frayed end. If you could grasp a bundle Of nerves in your fist like a jumper cable, and sense that Python’s writhe, or a garden hose when the pressure’s   High and it wilfully weaves about Trying its best to get away from you— You’d see how nothing is passive, We’re all—I mean from our elephant sun, ejaculant   Great-grandfather, cascading down To weightless   Unstoppable neutrinos Leaving their silvery trace   In vacuum chambers, in Effervescent lines, twisted   Madly in our madhouse jackets, Rules, laws, which we are seething to break   Though to rupture them might be of course to die, Or, possibly,   To change: Boil, it’s what water And everything else teaches.
***
Like a bowerbird trailing a beakful of weeds   Like prize ribbons for the very best The lover, producer   Of another’s pleasure He whom her swollen lips await Might wing through any day of the decade A form of health insurance   For which it is never too late Titanic, silver brush Hindenburg, of exploding cigars a climax The watery below, the fiery above Ashes of print between—pigment between If the crippled woman were to descend   From her bed, her fortress beyond midnight Downstairs (nude/staircase) to the kitchen   Naked to sit at the table (writing/thinking) She might hear the washer spin like a full orchestra   Complete a cycle like a train crash Before the fiend would stare through the window   Step smoothly into the kitchen, stop some clocks. Envy shapes a fig tree in one’s breast,   That is, bluntly to say, a cancer, That is to say In a mind, a fertile windy field. A murdered child. Well then, fear, primarily of falling.   Ebony surf toils on the beach, a glaze At the same moment I am (from a cliff) falling   The kitchen fiend removes his Dior tie Places his hand over the woman’s   And softly says: I am the lover. Now if the crippled woman began to dance   To pirouette, to rumba Growling for her child Her burning page, the devil would be shamed (Materialism is not for everyone / Religion is   The extension of politics by other means***
Calmly we walk through this April’s day,   Metropolitan poetry here and there,   In the park sit pauper and rentier,   The screaming children, the motor-car   Fugitive about us, running away,   Between the worker and the millionaire   Number provides all distances,   It is Nineteen Thirty-Seven now,   Many great dears are taken away,   What will become of you and me (This is the school in which we learn ...)   Besides the photo and the memory? (... that time is the fire in which we burn.) (This is the school in which we learn ...)   What is the self amid this blaze? What am I now that I was then Which I shall suffer and act again, The theodicy I wrote in my high school days   Restored all life from infancy, The children shouting are bright as they run   (This is the school in which they learn ...)   Ravished entirely in their passing play! (... that time is the fire in which they burn.) Avid its rush, that reeling blaze! Where is my father and Eleanor? Not where are they now, dead seven years,   But what they were then?                                      No more? No more? From Nineteen-Fourteen to the present day,   Bert Spira and Rhoda consume, consume Not where they are now (where are they now?)   But what they were then, both beautiful; Each minute bursts in the burning room,   The great globe reels in the solar fire,   Spinning the trivial and unique away. (How all things flash! How all things flare!)   What am I now that I was then?   May memory restore again and again   The smallest color of the smallest day:   Time is the school in which we learn,   Time is the fire in which we burn.
***
And here it comes: around the world, In Chicago, Petersburg, Tokyo, the dancers Hit the floor running (the communal dancefloor Here, there, at intervals, sometimes paved,  Sometimes rotted linoleum awash in beer,  Sometimes a field across which the dancers streak Like violets across grass, sometimes packed dirt  In a township of corrugated metal roofs) And what was once prescribed ritual, the profuse Strains of premeditated art, is now improvisation,  The desperately new, where to the sine-curved  Yelps and spasms of police sirens outside The club, a spasmodic feedback ululates  The death and cremation of history,  Until a boy whose hair is purple spikes, And a girl wearing a skull That wants to say I’m cool but I’m in pain, Get up and dance together, sort of, age thirteen. Young allegorists, they’ll mime motions Of shootouts, of tortured ones in basements,  Of cold insinuations before sex Between enemies, the jubilance of the criminal.  The girl tosses her head and dances  The shoplifter’s meanness and self-betrayal For a pair of stockings, a scarf, a perfume,  The boy dances stealing the truck,  Shooting his father. The point is to become a flying viper,  A diving vulva, the great point Is experiment, like pollen flinging itself Into far other habitats, or seed  That travels a migrant bird’s gut  To be shit overseas. The creatures gamble on the whirl of life  And every adolescent body hot Enough to sweat it out on the dance floor Is a laboratory: maybe this lipstick, these boots,  These jeans, these earrings, maybe if I flip  My hair and vibrate my pelvis Exactly synched to the band’s wildfire noise  That imitates history’s catastrophe  Nuke for nuke, maybe I’ll survive, Maybe we’ll all survive. . . . At the intersection of poverty and plague The planet's children—brave, uncontrollable, juiced  Out of their gourds—invent the sacred dance. 
***
The first warm day,  and by mid-afternoon  the snow is no more  than a washing strewn over the yards, the bedding rolled in knots  and leaking water,  the white shirts lying  under the evergreens.  Through the heaviest drifts  rise autumn’s fallen  bicycles, small carnivals  of paint and chrome,  the Octopus and Tilt-A-Whirl  beginning to turn in the sun. Now children,  stiffened by winter  and dressed, somehow,  like old men, mutter  and bend to the work  of building dams. But such a spring is brief;  by five o’clock the chill of sundown,  darkness, the blue TVs  flashing like storms in the picture windows,  the yards gone gray,  the wet dogs barking  at nothing. Far off  across the cornfields staked for streets and sewers,  the body of a farmer  missing since fall will show up in his garden tomorrow,  as unexpected as a tulip. 
***
The gravel road rides with a slow gallop  over the fields, the telephone lines  streaming behind, its billow of dust  full of the sparks of redwing blackbirds. On either side, those dear old ladies, the loosening barns, their little windows  dulled by cataracts of hay and cobwebs  hide broken tractors under their skirts. So this is Nebraska. A Sunday  afternoon; July. Driving along with your hand out squeezing the air,  a meadowlark waiting on every post. Behind a shelterbelt of cedars, top-deep in hollyhocks, pollen and bees,  a pickup kicks its fenders off and settles back to read the clouds. You feel like that; you feel like letting  your tires go flat, like letting the mice  build a nest in your muffler, like being  no more than a truck in the weeds, clucking with chickens or sticky with honey  or holding a skinny old man in your lap  while he watches the road, waiting for someone to wave to. You feel like waving. You feel like stopping the car and dancing around on the road. You wave  instead and leave your hand out gliding  larklike over the wheat, over the houses. 
***
In the naked bed, in Plato’s cave, Reflected headlights slowly slid the wall,   Carpenters hammered under the shaded window,   Wind troubled the window curtains all night long,   A fleet of trucks strained uphill, grinding,   Their freights covered, as usual. The ceiling lightened again, the slanting diagram   Slid slowly forth.                             Hearing the milkman’s chop,   His striving up the stair, the bottle’s chink,   I rose from bed, lit a cigarette, And walked to the window. The stony street   Displayed the stillness in which buildings stand,   The street-lamp’s vigil and the horse’s patience.   The winter sky’s pure capital Turned me back to bed with exhausted eyes. Strangeness grew in the motionless air. The loose   Film grayed. Shaking wagons, hooves’ waterfalls,   Sounded far off, increasing, louder and nearer.   A car coughed, starting. Morning, softly   Melting the air, lifted the half-covered chair   From underseas, kindled the looking-glass,   Distinguished the dresser and the white wall.   The bird called tentatively, whistled, called,   Bubbled and whistled, so! Perplexed, still wet   With sleep, affectionate, hungry and cold. So, so,   O son of man, the ignorant night, the travail   Of early morning, the mystery of beginning   Again and again,                          while History is unforgiven.
***
In musty light, in the thin brown air  of damp carpet, doll heads and rust,  beneath long rows of sharp footfalls  like nails in a lid, an old man stands  trying on glasses, lifting each pair from the box like a glittering fish  and holding it up to the light of a dirty bulb. Near him, a heap  of enameled pans as white as skulls  looms in the catacomb shadows,  and old toilets with dry red throats  cough up bouquets of curtain rods. You’ve seen him somewhere before.  He’s wearing the green leisure suit  you threw out with the garbage,  and the Christmas tie you hated,  and the ventilated wingtip shoes  you found in your father’s closet  and wore as a joke. And the glasses  which finally fit him, through which  he looks to see you looking back— two mirrors which flash and glance— are those through which one day you too will look down over the years,  when you have grown old and thin  and no longer particular, and the things you once thought  you were rid of forever have taken you back in their arms. 
***
It’s a kitchen. Its curtains fill with a morning light so bright   you can’t see beyond its windows   into the afternoon. A kitchen   falling through time with its things   in their places, the dishes jingling   up in the cupboard, the bucket   of drinking water rippled as if a truck had just gone past, but that truck   was thirty years. No one’s at home   in this room. Its counter is wiped,   and the dishrag hangs from its nail,   a dry leaf. In housedresses of mist,   blue aprons of rain, my grandmother   moved through this life like a ghost,   and when she had finished her years,   she put them all back in their places and wiped out the sink, turning her back   on the rest of us, forever. 
***
Beside the highway, the Giant Slide with its rusty undulations lifts out of the weeds. It hasn’t been used  for a generation. The ticket booth tilts to that side where the nickels shifted  over the years. A chain link fence keeps out  the children and drunks. Blue morning glories  climb halfway up the stairs, bright clusters  of laughter. Call it a passing fancy, this slide that nobody slides down now.  Those screams have all gone east on a wind that will never stop blowing  down from the Rockies and over the plains,  where things catch on for a little while,  bright leaves in a fence, and then are gone. 
***
Dogs are Shakespearean, children are strangers. Let Freud and Wordsworth discuss the child, Angels and Platonists shall judge the dog, The running dog, who paused, distending nostrils, Then barked and wailed; the boy who pinched his sister,   The little girl who sang the song from Twelfth Night,   As if she understood the wind and rain, The dog who moaned, hearing the violins in concert.   —O I am sad when I see dogs or children! For they are strangers, they are Shakespearean. Tell us, Freud, can it be that lovely children   Have merely ugly dreams of natural functions?   And you, too, Wordsworth, are children truly   Clouded with glory, learned in dark Nature?   The dog in humble inquiry along the ground,   The child who credits dreams and fears the dark,   Know more and less than you: they know full well   Nor dream nor childhood answer questions well:   You too are strangers, children are Shakespearean. Regard the child, regard the animal,   Welcome strangers, but study daily things,   Knowing that heaven and hell surround us,   But this, this which we say before we’re sorry,   This which we live behind our unseen faces,   Is neither dream, nor childhood, neither   Myth, nor landscape, final, nor finished,   For we are incomplete and know no future,   And we are howling or dancing out our souls   In beating syllables before the curtain:   We are Shakespearean, we are strangers.
***
When I wake now it’s below ocherous, saw-ridged pine beams. Haze streaks all three windows. I look up at the dog-eared, glossy magazine photoI’ve taken with me for years. It gets tackedlike a claim to some new wall in the next place—Bill Russell & Wilt Chamberlain, one on onethe final game of the 1969 NBA championship,two hard men snapped elbowing & snatching at a basketball as if it were a moment one of them might stay inside forever. I was withmy father the night that game playedon a fuzzy color television, in a jammed Fall River bar. Seagram & beer chasers for hoarse ex-jocks,smoke rifting the air. A drunk called him “Tiger”and asked about the year he’d made all-state guard—point man, ball-hawk, pacer. Something he rarely spoke of, & almost always with a gruff mix of impatience and shyness. Each year,days painting suburban tract houses & fighting with contractors followed bynight shifts at the fire stationfollowed by his kids swarming at breakfastand my mother trying to stay out of his way,each of the many stone-hard moments between 1941 & 1969—they made up a city of granite millsby a slate & blue river. That town was my father’s life, & still is. If he felt cheated by it,by its fate for him,to bear that disappointment, he kept it secret.                                                Thatnight, when he stared deep into a drunk’s memory, he frowned. He said nothing. He twisted on the stool, and ordered this guy a beer.Whatever my father & I have in commonis mostly silence. And anger that keeps twisting back on itself, though not before it ruins,often, even something simpleas a walk in the dunes at a warm beach.But what we share too is a love so awkwardthat it explains, with unreasoning perfection,why we still can’t speakeasily to each other, about the past or anything else,and why I wake this far from the place where I grew up, while the wall above me claims nownothing has changed & all is different.
***
The heavy bear who goes with me,   A manifold honey to smear his face,   Clumsy and lumbering here and there,   The central ton of every place,   The hungry beating brutish one   In love with candy, anger, and sleep,   Crazy factotum, dishevelling all,   Climbs the building, kicks the football,   Boxes his brother in the hate-ridden city. Breathing at my side, that heavy animal,   That heavy bear who sleeps with me,   Howls in his sleep for a world of sugar,   A sweetness intimate as the water’s clasp,   Howls in his sleep because the tight-rope   Trembles and shows the darkness beneath.   —The strutting show-off is terrified,   Dressed in his dress-suit, bulging his pants,   Trembles to think that his quivering meat   Must finally wince to nothing at all. That inescapable animal walks with me, Has followed me since the black womb held,   Moves where I move, distorting my gesture,   A caricature, a swollen shadow, A stupid clown of the spirit’s motive,   Perplexes and affronts with his own darkness,   The secret life of belly and bone, Opaque, too near, my private, yet unknown,   Stretches to embrace the very dear With whom I would walk without him near,   Touches her grossly, although a word Would bare my heart and make me clear,   Stumbles, flounders, and strives to be fed   Dragging me with him in his mouthing care,   Amid the hundred million of his kind,   The scrimmage of appetite everywhere.
***
Dawn comes later and later now,  and I, who only a month ago could sit with coffee every morning  watching the light walk down the hill  to the edge of the pond and place  a doe there, shyly drinking, then see the light step out upon  the water, sowing reflections  to either side—a garden of trees that grew as if by magic— now see no more than my face,  mirrored by darkness, pale and odd, startled by time. While I slept,  night in its thick winter jacket  bridled the doe with a twist of wet leaves and led her away, then brought its black horse with harness  that creaked like a cricket, and turned the water garden under. I woke,  and at the waiting window found  the curtains open to my open face;  beyond me, darkness. And I, who only wished to keep looking out,  must now keep looking in. 
***
THE MIND IS AN ANCIENT AND FAMOUS CAPITAL The mind is a city like London, Smoky and populous: it is a capital Like Rome, ruined and eternal, Marked by the monuments which no one Now remembers. For the mind, like Rome, contains   Catacombs, aqueducts, amphitheatres, palaces, Churches and equestrian statues, fallen, broken or soiled.   The mind possesses and is possessed by all the ruins   Of every haunted, hunted generation’s celebration. “Call us what you will: we are made such by love.”   We are such studs as dreams are made on, and   Our little lives are ruled by the gods, by Pan, Piping of all, seeking to grasp or grasping All of the grapes; and by the bow-and-arrow god, Cupid, piercing the heart through, suddenly and forever. Dusk we are, to dusk returning, after the burbing,   After the gold fall, the fallen ash, the bronze,   Scattered and rotten, after the white null statues which   Are winter, sleep, and nothingness: when   Will the houselights of the universe Light up and blaze?                             For it is not the sea Which murmurs in a shell, And it is not only heart, at harp o’clock,   It is the dread terror of the uncontrollable   Horses of the apocalypse, running in wild dread   Toward Arcturus—and returning as suddenly ... THE FEAR AND DREAD OF THE MIND OF THE OTHERS —The others were the despots of despair— The river’s freshness sailed from unknown sources— ... They snickered giggled, laughed aloud at last,   They mocked and marvelled at the statue which was   A caricature, as strained and stiff, and yet   A statue of self-love!—since self-love was To them, truly my true love, how, then, was I a stillness of nervousness   So nervous a caricature: did they suppose   Self-love was unrequited, or betrayed? They thought I had fallen in love with my own face,   And this belief became the night-like obstacle   To understanding all my unbroken suffering,   My studious self-regard, the pain of hope,   The torment of possibility: How then could I have expected them to see me   As I saw myself, within my gaze, or see That being thus seemed as a toad, a frog, a wen, a mole.   Knowing their certainty that I was only A monument, a monster who had fallen in love   With himself alone, how could I have Told them what was in me, within my heart, trembling and passionate   Within the labyrinth and caves of my mind, which is   Like every mind partly or wholly hidden from itself?   The words for what is in my heart and in my mind   Do not exist. But I must seek and search to find   Amid the vines and orchards of the vivid world of day   Approximate images, imaginary parallels For what is my heart and dark within my mind:   Comparisons and mere metaphors: for all Of them are substitutes, both counterfeit and vague: They are, at most, deceptive resemblances, False in their very likeness, like the sons Who are alike and kin and more unlike and false Because they seem the father’s very self: but each one is   —Although begotten by the same forbears—himself, The unique self, each one is unique, like every other one,   And everything, older or younger, nevertheless A passionate nonesuch who has before has been. Do you hear, do you see? Do you understand me now, and how   The words for what is my heart do not exist? THE RIVER WAS THE EMBLEM OF ALL BEAUTY:   ALL ... The river was the abundant belly of beauty itself   The river was the dream space where I walked, The river was itself and yet it was—flowing and freshening— A self anew, another self, or self renewed At every tick of eternity, and by each glint of light   Mounting or sparkling, descending to shade and black   —Had I but told them my heart, told how it was Taunted at noon and pacified at dusk, at starfall midnight   Strong in hope once more, ever in eagerness Jumping like joy, would they have heard? How could they? How, when what they knew was, like the grass, Simple and certain, known through the truth of touch, another form and fountain of falsehood’s fecundity— Gazing upon their faces as they gazed Could they have seen my faces as whores who are   Holy and deified as priestesses of hope                          —the sacred virgins of futurity— Promising dear divinity precisely because   They were disfigured ducks who might become And be, and ever beloved, white swans, noble and beautiful.                                     Could they have seen how my faces were Bonfires of worship and vigil, blazes of adoration and hope   —Surely they would have laughed again, renewed their scorn,   Giggled and snickered, cruel. Surely have said This is the puerile mania of the obsessed, The living logic of the lunatic: I was the statue of their merriment, Dead and a death, Pharoah and monster forsaken and lost. ... My faces were my apes: my apes became   Performers in the Sundays of their parks,   Buffoons or clowns in the farce or comedy When they took pleasure in knowing that they were not like me. ... I waited like obsession in solitude: The sun’s white terror tore and roared at me,   The moonlight, almond white, at night,   Whether awake or sleeping, arrested me   And sang, softly, haunted, unlike the sun But as the sun. Withheld from me or took away   Despair or peace, making me once more With thought of what had never been before——
***
1 The children of the Czar   Played with a bouncing ball In the May morning, in the Czar’s garden,   Tossing it back and forth. It fell among the flowerbeds   Or fled to the north gate. A daylight moon hung up In the Western sky, bald white. Like Papa’s face, said Sister,   Hurling the white ball forth.        2 While I ate a baked potato   Six thousand miles apart, In Brooklyn, in 1916,   Aged two, irrational. When Franklin D. Roosevelt   Was an Arrow Collar ad. O Nicholas! Alas! Alas! My grandfather coughed in your army, Hid in a wine-stinking barrel,   For three days in Bucharest Then left for America To become a king himself.        3 I am my father’s father, You are your children’s guilt. In history’s pity and terror   The child is Aeneas again; Troy is in the nursery, The rocking horse is on fire. Child labor! The child must carry   His fathers on his back. But seeing that so much is past   And that history has no ruth For the individual, Who drinks tea, who catches cold, Let anger be general: I hate an abstract thing.        4 Brother and sister bounced   The bounding, unbroken ball, The shattering sun fell down   Like swords upon their play, Moving eastward among the stars   Toward February and October. But the Maywind brushed their cheeks   Like a mother watching sleep, And if for a moment they fight   Over the bouncing ball And sister pinches brother   And brother kicks her shins, Well! The heart of man is known:   It is a cactus bloom.        5 The ground on which the ball bounces   Is another bouncing ball. The wheeling, whirling world   Makes no will glad. Spinning in its spotlight darkness,   It is too big for their hands. A pitiless, purposeless Thing,   Arbitrary and unspent, Made for no play, for no children,   But chasing only itself. The innocent are overtaken,   They are not innocent. They are their father’s fathers, The past is inevitable.        6 Now, in another October   Of this tragic star, I see my second year,   I eat my baked potato. It is my buttered world, But, poked by my unlearned hand, It falls from the highchair down   And I begin to howl. And I see the ball roll under   The iron gate which is locked. Sister is screaming, brother is howling,   The ball has evaded their will. Even a bouncing ball   Is uncontrollable, And is under the garden wall.   I am overtaken by terror Thinking of my father’s fathers,   And of my own will.
***
Jeremiah Dickson was a true-blue American, For he was a little boy who understood America, for he felt that he must Think about everything; because that’s all there is to think about,   Knowing immediately the intimacy of truth and comedy,   Knowing intuitively how a sense of humor was a necessity   For one and for all who live in America. Thus, natively, and   Naturally when on an April Sunday in an ice cream parlor Jeremiah   Was requested to choose between a chocolate sundae and a banana split He answered unhesitatingly, having no need to think of it Being a true-blue American, determined to continue as he began:   Rejecting the either-or of Kierkegaard, and many another European;   Refusing to accept alternatives, refusing to believe the choice of between; Rejecting selection; denying dilemma; electing absolute affirmation: knowing          in his breast                   The infinite and the gold                   Of the endless frontier, the deathless West. “Both: I will have them both!” declared this true-blue American   In Cambridge, Massachusetts, on an April Sunday, instructed          By the great department stores, by the Five-and-Ten, Taught by Christmas, by the circus, by the vulgarity and grandeur of          Niagara Falls and the Grand Canyon, Tutored by the grandeur, vulgarity, and infinite appetite gratified and            Shining in the darkness, of the light On Saturdays at the double bills of the moon pictures, The consummation of the advertisements of the imagination of the light Which is as it was—the infinite belief in infinite hope—of Columbus,            Barnum, Edison, and Jeremiah Dickson.
***
After his ham & cheese in the drape factory cafeteria,  having slipped by the bald shipping foreman  to ride a rattling elevator to the attic where doves flicker into the massive eaves and where piled boxes of out-of-style cotton and lace won’t ever be decorating anyone’s sun parlor windows. Having dozed off in that hideout he fixed between five four-by-six cardboard storage cartons  while the rest of us pack Mediterranean Dreams  and Colonial Ruffles and drapes colored like moons,  and he wakes lost— shot through into a world of unlocked unlocking light— suddenly he knows where he is and feels half nuts  and feels like killing some pigeons with a slingshot. That’s all, and that’s why he pokes his calloused fingers into the broken machinery,  hunting for loose nuts a half inch wide— five greasy cold ones that warm in his pocket— and yanks back the snag-cut strip of inner tube  with a nut snug at the curve to snap it  at the soft chest of a dopey bird. Then the noise of pigeons flopping down  to creosoted hardwood, and then a grin  the guy gives me & all his other pals later.  And afternoon tightens down on all  our shoulders, until the shift whistle  blasts, blowing through the plant like air  through lace. As it always has, as it does.  That bright. That stunned.
***
When I fall asleep, and even during sleep, I hear, quite distinctly, voices speaking Whole phrases, commonplace and trivial,   Having no relation to my affairs.   Dear Mother, is any time left to us In which to be happy? My debts are immense. My bank account is subject to the court’s judgment. I know nothing. I cannot know anything.   I have lost the ability to make an effort. But now as before my love for you increases.   You are always armed to stone me, always:   It is true. It dates from childhood. For the first time in my long life I am almost happy. The book, almost finished,   Almost seems good. It will endure, a monument To my obsessions, my hatred, my disgust.   Debts and inquietude persist and weaken me.   Satan glides before me, saying sweetly: “Rest for a day! You can rest and play today.   Tonight you will work.” When night comes,   My mind, terrified by the arrears, Bored by sadness, paralyzed by impotence,   Promises: “Tomorrow: I will tomorrow.” Tomorrow the same comedy enacts itself   With the same resolution, the same weakness.   I am sick of this life of furnished rooms.   I am sick of having colds and headaches:   You know my strange life. Every day brings Its quota of wrath. You little know A poet’s life, dear Mother: I must write poems,   The most fatiguing of occupations. I am sad this morning. Do not reproach me. I write from a café near the post office, Amid the click of billiard balls, the clatter of dishes,   The pounding of my heart. I have been asked to write   “A History of Caricature.” I have been asked to write   “A History of Sculpture.” Shall I write a history Of the caricatures of the sculptures of you in my heart? Although it costs you countless agony, Although you cannot believe it necessary, And doubt that the sum is accurate, Please send me money enough for at least three weeks.
***
When I was a young man, I loved to write poems            And I called a spade a spade And the only only thing that made me sing            Was to lift the masks at the masquerade.   I took them off my own face,          I took them off others too And the only only wrong in all my song          Was the view that I knew what was true. Now I am older and tireder too          And the tasks with the masks are quite trying.   I’d gladly gladly stop if I only only knew          A better way to keep from lying,   And not get nervous and blue          When I said something quite untrue:   I looked all around and all over          To find something else to do:   I tried to be less romantic          I tried to be less starry-eyed too:   But I only got mixed up and frantic          Forgetting what was false and what was true. But tonight I am going to the masked ball,          Because it has occurred to me That the masks are more true than the faces:          —Perhaps this too is poetry? I no longer yearn to be naïve and stern          And masked balls fascinate me: Now that I know that most falsehoods are true          Perhaps I can join the charade?   This is, at any rate, my new and true view:          Let live and believe, I say. The only only thing is to believe in everything:          It’s more fun and safer that way!
***
She had turned her face up into a rain of light, and came on smiling. The light trickled down her forehead  and into her eyes. It ran down into the neck of her sweatshirt and wet the white tops of her breasts. Her brown shoes splashed on into the light. The moment was like a circus wagon rolling before her through puddles of light, a cage on wheels, and she walked fast behind it,  exuberant, curious, pushing her cane through the bars, poking and prodding,  while the world cowered back in a corner. 
***
Sometimes everything feels like a trick. Some days things seem to have been stolen from you.  Cash to pay the bills, your sense of humor, friendship.  You could almost believe those are what you look for as you walk around your neighborhood. But, no, instead, you get  splashes of zinnias against stucco, cactus wrens,  a pack of kids who ignore the sodium amber streetlights  which just stuttered on, because it means their mothers  want them home right this minute. And, on the corner variety  store’s wall, a crude, sun-washed mural of the angel Gabriel  defaced by thick black sideburns so he looks like a street punk,  a strutting cholo, so he seems the only creature on earth  who hasn’t heard the news that everything can be lost.  His strong upper arms curving naked and graceful  as the tan thighs of a slender, athletic girl. A girl he’s after, though she’s gotten bored waiting on the stoop and watching the sun set behind the foothills.  Sky reddening until it slams into a blue that blesses  anyone oblivious to all the negations, including the one, pal, where you think it’s possible  to step out of your heart and leave it empty as  an egg shell or a cardboard box. When you finally return home the tint of sky more or less matches the flash of a thrush as it swoops from limb to branch, acacia to willow. Standing at the kitchen counter, you pick through a carton of strawberries. Good juicy ones from the moldy and over-ripe. Choices that are easy. What do you trust anymore? The aproned man in the mercado said California strawberries, they’re the best this time of year. In bed, later, you remember the grocer, round belly under his apron,  but as you start, nearly asleep, to tell your wife about him,  how he talked about his deals, she starts reading aloud from a tattered bird guide, that the wood thrush  is “essentially useful and worthwhile.” What is worthwhile?                      Now, remember.
***
Father: ***
I have seen the Brown Recluse Spider  run with a net in her hand, or rather,  what resembled a net, what resembled a hand. She ran down the gleaming white floor  of the bathtub, trailing a frail swirl  of hair, and in it the hull of a beetle  lay woven. The hair was my wife’s,  long and dark, a few loose strands, a curl  she might idly have turned on a finger,  she might idly have twisted, speaking to me,  and the legs of the beetle were broken. 
***
Written on clapboard or asbestos siding, the cartoony   spray-paint signatures of Apollo and Zeus, two home boys out bombing last night in thick fog. Fog near the shade of pearls. Except they didn’t see the mist   that way, glad for their thin leather gloves. Wind raw at the wide avenue, so they cut from there to here.                               Even if this is in the past tense, tense of the totally chilled-out, even if they argued here over Krylon blue or candy-apple red,   that doesn’t mean they knocked-off and streaked home then.   And if I saw fog the shade of pearls it doesn’t mean my heart in its own corrosive and healing fog   can’t tug on thin leather gloves and stand in front of a wall, pissing off the Fates and whoever else owns that wall. Whoever owns it   means less than the dry, fallen leaves of eucalyptus   blown crackling over tar and concrete and sounding, when you shut your eyes, like every tree   bursting into leaf for the first time, speeded-up like the first minute of the world.
***
Long ago we quit lifting our heels like the others—horse, dog, and tiger— though we thrill to their speed as they flee. Even the mouse bearing the great weight of a nugget  of dog food is enviably graceful. There is little spring to our walk, we are so burdened with responsibility,  all of the disciplinary actions that have fallen to us, the punishments,  the killings, and all with our feet bound stiff in the skins of the conquered.  But sometimes, in the early hours,  we can feel what it must have been like  to be one of them, up on our toes, stealing past doors where others are sleeping,  and suddenly able to see in the dark. 
***
Each could picture probably with great care his brother drawing   the corded string of a watered silk bag and mumbling to Basho above the keepsake   pay your respects to mother's white hair   now your eyebrows look a little white too***
They have set aside their black tin boxes,   scratched and dented, spattered with drops of pink and blue;   and their dried-up, rolled-up tubes   of alizarin crimson, chrome green,   zinc white, and ultramarine; their vials half full of gold powder;   stubs of wax pencils; frayed brushes with tooth-bitten shafts;   and have gone in fashion and with grace   into the clouds of loose, lush roses,   narcissus, pansies, columbine,   on teapots, chocolate pots, saucers and cups, the good Haviland dishes   spread like a garden on the white lace Sunday cloth,   as if their souls were bees and the world had been nothing but flowers. 
***
Now that everything seems so persuasive   you will go on changing      as always   it has always been the case with you   whether you knew it or not      ever since   that morning in the swamp      that Sunday   a sunless windy morning      when   right in front of you      a fat hive dropped   unbidden      out of a blackened tree   a tupelo      and where it fell      the water   was shallow      eighteen inches at most   but in it      one hundred & fifty-six wasps   drowned      so      no      you are not finished      your apprenticeship is not yet over   you have fallen in love      inadvertently      you   are the bride-to-be      and now      having   dressed yourself in the gown      for practice   you must stand before a mirror   in the upper right-hand corner of   which      all of a sudden      a courtroom   will appear      the litigants judge & jury   suspended there      in midair      a news   bulletin      the reporter's face reflected   from a portable television far across   the room      the sound turned down   the litigants looking tense      or bored   the whole crew of them a little   self-conscious      like characters who have just recently been conjured      though somewhat   incompletely      by a staff of studio writers   in Century City      California In a field off a Vermont road      later   this week      you'll listen to a car ticking as it cools      the sound of the engine   blending with the cicadas in tall bluegrass   floating past      as in a dream then   you will finger the veil & lift your mother & father long ago set aside   in a folder for silences & song you'll waken      almost immediately   reborn      you will have lifted the veil   though of course      sooner or later      farther   down the line      that stranger      the one   with whom you spend so much time   in your mind      talking      he will reveal   he is your brother      and what will you have to say to him then      when   as he must      he asks if you had allowed yourself to lead a happy life   in spite of the fact your parents had not      what is it you will tell him   what answer can you give?
***
It seemed those rose-pink dishes   she kept for special company   were always cold, brought down   from the shelf in jingling stacks,   the plates like the panes of ice   she broke from the water bucket   winter mornings, the flaring cups   like tulips that opened too early and got bitten by frost. They chilled   the coffee no matter how quickly   you drank, while a heavy everyday mug would have kept   a splash hot for the better part of a conversation. It was hard   to hold up your end of the gossip   with your coffee cold, but it was   a special occasion, just the same,   to sit at her kitchen table and sip the bitter percolation of the past week’s rumors from cups   it had taken a year to collect   at the grocery, with one piece free   for each five pounds of flour. 
***
It is 12:20 in New York a Friday three days after Bastille day, yes it is 1959 and I go get a shoeshine because I will get off the 4:19 in Easthampton   at 7:15 and then go straight to dinner and I don’t know the people who will feed me I walk up the muggy street beginning to sun   and have a hamburger and a malted and buy an ugly NEW WORLD WRITING to see what the poets   in Ghana are doing these days                                                         I go on to the bank and Miss Stillwagon (first name Linda I once heard)   doesn’t even look up my balance for once in her life   and in the GOLDEN GRIFFIN I get a little Verlaine   for Patsy with drawings by Bonnard although I do   think of Hesiod, trans. Richmond Lattimore or   Brendan Behan’s new play or Le Balcon or Les Nègres of Genet, but I don’t, I stick with Verlaine after practically going to sleep with quandariness and for Mike I just stroll into the PARK LANE Liquor Store and ask for a bottle of Strega and   then I go back where I came from to 6th Avenue   and the tobacconist in the Ziegfeld Theatre and   casually ask for a carton of Gauloises and a carton of Picayunes, and a NEW YORK POST with her face on it and I am sweating a lot by now and thinking of leaning on the john door in the 5 SPOT while she whispered a song along the keyboard to Mal Waldron and everyone and I stopped breathing
***
The days are dog-eared, the edges torn,   ragged—like those pages   I ripped once out of library books, for their photos of Vallejo and bootless Robert Johnson.   A fine needs paying now it’s true, but   not by me. I am no more guilty than that thrush is who sits there stripping moss   off the wet bark of a tree. A red fleck, like his, glows at the back of my head—a beauty mark,   left by the brain’s after-jets. I would not wish for the three brains   Robert required to double-clutch his guitar and chase those sounds he had to know   led down and into a troubled dusky river, always. Three brains did Johnson no earthly good,   neither his nor Vallejo’s 4 & 1/2 worked right exactly—O bunglers, O banged-up pans of disaster! Crying for days, said Cesar, & singing for months.   How can I be so strong some times, at others weak? I wish to be free, but free to do what? To leave myself behind?   To switch channels remotely? Better to sing. Not like the bird, but as they sang,   Cesar & Robert— with the shocked & seeded   sweetness of an apple split open by a meat cleaver.
***
Sunlight fades the storefront full of magazines. Month to month they boss us—the covers, they tell us that if we want to get happy & alluring   (real happy, alluring sexually) we must for goddamn sure take up the breeding of Jack Russell terriers,   or else dig ourselves a little backyard fishpond. Days of fish, days of dog, days of sex— in that order, necessarily. In the sun all the titles are trying to vanish—phrases like trout pond diluted, the 20-point sans serif, inked-red   passion bleached now, apathetic, ghostly— words that want my attention   like movers on the street lugging mirrors, a moment when I seem to   come toward myself & then   I’m gone too. I am not a greedy man. All I want is to be a visitor to this life.
***
From the tower window the moon draws a silver maple’s shadow across a spangled lawn;                                   horses rear, manes lashing the air, front legs floating.                               Half monarch, half shadow, the tree  aspires to the sky; one branch, cracked by lightning, scrapes the earth.                             Reflected on the grass, bent twigs are curved hooves, galloping as the moon rises. Divided it stands in wholeness, mourning its victories, praising the god of trees, the king of horses. The tree holds souls in a bark prison poised like a runner at the starting line— and bolts free, wildly pawing the ground those roots lie under.
***
I wanted to be sure to reach you; though my ship was on the way it got caught   in some moorings. I am always tying up   and then deciding to depart. In storms and   at sunset, with the metallic coils of the tide   around my fathomless arms, I am unable   to understand the forms of my vanity   or I am hard alee with my Polish rudder   in my hand and the sun sinking. To   you I offer my hull and the tattered cordage   of my will. The terrible channels where   the wind drives me against the brown lips   of the reeds are not all behind me. Yet   I trust the sanity of my vessel; and   if it sinks, it may well be in answer   to the reasoning of the eternal voices, the waves which have kept me from reaching you.
***
It’s my lunch hour, so I go for a walk among the hum-colored   cabs. First, down the sidewalk   where laborers feed their dirty   glistening torsos sandwiches and Coca-Cola, with yellow helmets   on. They protect them from falling   bricks, I guess. Then onto the   avenue where skirts are flipping   above heels and blow up over   grates. The sun is hot, but the   cabs stir up the air. I look   at bargains in wristwatches. There   are cats playing in sawdust.                                           On to Times Square, where the sign blows smoke over my head, and higher   the waterfall pours lightly. A   Negro stands in a doorway with a   toothpick, languorously agitating.   A blonde chorus girl clicks: he   smiles and rubs his chin. Everything   suddenly honks: it is 12:40 of   a Thursday.                 Neon in daylight is a   great pleasure, as Edwin Denby would   write, as are light bulbs in daylight.   I stop for a cheeseburger at JULIET’S   CORNER***
Scaling ladders with buckets of white enamel, I painted the stars and the moon on my windowpanes   to hold back days and nights. I yanked the telephone and stopped the wooden clock. The weeks a lightning stroke,   desire turned to love. With my blue diamond, I sliced minutes in half and made days vanish, fooling the hours.                            I became so skillful   at firmaments that miracles occurred: a bearded comet moved across the room   breeding no omens, tearing no major kingdoms   into small provinces, but there it was,   reminding us that rock may spin and flare,   lifting the senses, burning into sight. You eased pale hands away; I saw your shoulders   recede through doorways, watched your image fail   with your famished smile. I left our room with dream-filled eyes, and standing in the sun,   I gazed at bricks and glass and saw, suddenly,   flashing in stony light, the stars and the moon.
***
That day I hired a private detective to follow me,  and could not read his notes. In a tangled grove,  I hid behind white pines, compressed my body,  then watched him write, left-handed and myopic,  under an Irish cap, when I asked for help  from strangers who spoke Slavic languages.  Wary, moving ahead, I found a depot, watched an immense train churn, haloed in steam,  and boarded, second class. I had no ticket,  and my expired passport represented a drooping head with unfamiliar eyes. Unshaken, rows behind, the stranger waited,  wielding camera and pen. Across the border I disembarked, but knew he would capture me,  with soundless footsteps, even on black gravel. I tried to recall my crime. I know I am guilty, but never why. Lawless, I have ignored those signs: WRONG WAY; GO BACK and NO WAY OUT,  circles that tell me YOU ARE HERE. I gather it is the whispers that explode, the looks that make dogs whimper. When I bow in prayer I think of love; I know I’ve killed my friends, pelting them with a touch—and yet I’ve heard they are alive. Besides, that’s not the real offense. I would cross any path, or trek through swamps to find my crime. But even he,  that bald, insistent man who follows me,  unsleeping, cannot tell me what I’ve done.
***
Squinting through eye-slits in our balaclavas,  we lurch across Washington Square Park  hunched against the wind, two hooded figures  caught in the monochrome, carrying sacks of fruit, as we’ve done for years. The frosted, starch- stiff sycamores make a lean Christmas tree seem to bulk larger, tilted under the arch and still lit in three colors. Once in January, we found a feather here and stuffed the quill  in twigs to recall that jay. The musical fountain  is here, its water gone, a limestone circle now. Though rap succeeds the bluegrass strains we’ve played in it, new praise evokes old sounds.  White branches mimic visions of past storms; some say they’ve heard ghosts moan above this ground,  once a potter’s field. No two stones are the same, of course: the drums, the tawny pears we hold,  are old masks for new things. Still, in a world  where fretted houses with façades are leveled  for condominiums, not much has altered here. At least it’s faithful to imagined views. And, after all, we know the sycamore will screen the sky in a receding wind. Now, trekking home through grit that’s mounting higher, faces upturned to test the whirling snow, in new masks, we whistle to make breath-clouds form  and disappear, and form again, and O,  my love, there’s sun in the crook of your arm.
***
Pardon us for uttering a handful of words in any language, so cut loose are we from homes, and from His name that is still   nameless, blessed be He. We raised a prayer house— that is, we broke new wood for one, but some tough burned it, snarling: “Carve only stones for the dead.” Damp ground, no fire, no psalm we all remember.   But tall ships anchor here, and at low tide, people with wheat-colored hair look out to sea,   just as we’d searched for land. “Pray if you must,” my father said, “and when prayer fails, a story,   if it is all you have, will do.” Months past, we left Recife’s forced-worship laws in the year of their Lord sixteen hundred and fifty-four, for our new   world, old-country Amsterdam. Leagues seaward,   Spanish pirates slaughtered our scant crew, and all that was left of us (friends wheezed their last while they ragged us on) rose up on deck   and tossed our bags in the sea. We watched the wake   turn silver: kiddish wine cups, hanging bowls, a candelabrum for the promised altar, carved pointers. Books’ pages curled and sank, prayer shawls ballooned and, soaking, spiraled downward.   Just as we stared, again we heard swords clank— a French ship, the Ste. Catherine (her prow had shone   gold on a gray horizon), came to our port side and rescued us. In that commotion on deck, we crouched below—not out of fear, I swear, but stunned by luminous words that echoed oddly—beautifully—like lightning   flickering through palls of thickset clouds.   A jaunty captain rasped to us in hiding: “Where are you bound?”                                   “Amsterdam. Old country.” “Where?”              “Amsterdam.”                                  “Antilles?”                                                    “No, Amsterdam.” “Yes, yes. Nieuw Amsterdam. I’ll see you get there safely.” He meant well, bless him. Ste. Catherine sailed to land at its tip no larger   than a meadow, fanned out at its sides: Manhattan Island. Our new master, Stuyvesant, lashed us with phrases, wheffs, guzzads, that stung but were not fathomed, mercifully,   when we came on a Sabbath, more than twenty   men, women, a baby born at sea. Still cursing, he let us land, and heard our praise, then disappeared among lank citizens with faded skin who stride to the bay and brood   on water that we trust and dread, and listen   to tales unstamped by laws and never sacred.
***
“Is there no balm in Gilead?” So cries  dour Jeremiah in granite tones.  “There is a balm in Gilead,” replies  a Negro spiritual. The baritone who chants it, leaning forward on the platform,  looks up, not knowing his voice is a rainstorm  that rinses air to reveal earth’s surprises. Today, the summer gone, four monarch butterflies, their breed’s survivors, sucked a flower’s last blooms,  opened their wings, orange-and-black stained glass,  and printed on the sky in zigzag lines, watch bright things rise: winter moons, the white undersides  of a California condor, once thought doomed, now flapping wide like the first bird from ashes.
***
Hopper never painted this, but here    on a snaky path his vision lingers: three white tombs, robots with glassed-in faces    and meters for eyes, grim mouths, flat noses, lean forward on a platform, like strangers    with identical frowns scanning a blur, far off, that might be their train. Gas tanks broken for decades face Parson’s smithy, planked shut now. Both relics must stay.    The pumps have roots in gas pools, and the smithy stores memories of hammers forging scythes    to cut spartina grass for dry salt hay. The tanks have the remove of local clammers    who sink buckets and stand, never in pairs, but one and one and one, blank-eyed, alone,    more serene than lonely. Today a woman rakes in the shallows, then bends to receive    last rays in shimmering water, her long shadow knifing the bay. She slides into her truck to watch the sky flame over sand flats, a hawk’s wind arabesque, an island risen, brown    Atlantis, at low tide; she probes the shoreline and beyond grassy dunes for where the land    might slope off into night. Hers is no common emptiness, but a vaster silence filled    with terns’ cries, an abundant solitude. Nearby, the three dry gas pumps, worn    survivors of clam-digging generations, are luminous, and have an exile’s grandeur    that says: In perfect solitude, there’s fire. One day I approached the vessels and wanted to drive on, the road ablaze with dogwood in full bloom, but the contraptions    outdazzled the road’s white, even outshone a bleached shirt flapping alone on a laundry line, arms pointed down. High noon. Three urns, ironic in their outcast    dignity—as though, like some pine chests, they might be prized in disuse—cast rays, spun leaf—covered numbers, clanked, then wheezed and stopped again. Shadows cut the road    before I drove off into the dark woods.
***
Mothers of America                                      let your kids go to the movies! get them out of the house so they won’t know what you’re up to   it’s true that fresh air is good for the body                                                                              but what about the soul   that grows in darkness, embossed by silvery images and when you grow old as grow old you must                                                                                 they won’t hate you   they won’t criticize you they won’t know                                                                          they’ll be in some glamorous country   they first saw on a Saturday afternoon or playing hookey they may even be grateful to you                                                             for their first sexual experience   which only cost you a quarter                                                        and didn’t upset the peaceful home   they will know where candy bars come from                                                                                  and gratuitous bags of popcorn   as gratuitous as leaving the movie before it’s over with a pleasant stranger whose apartment is in the Heaven on Earth Bldg   near the Williamsburg Bridge                                                        oh mothers you will have made the little tykes so happy because if nobody does pick them up in the movies   they won’t know the difference                                                          and if somebody does it’ll be sheer gravy   and they’ll have been truly entertained either way instead of hanging around the yard                                                                  or up in their room                                                                                                      hating you prematurely since you won’t have done anything horribly mean yet   except keeping them from the darker joys                                                                              it’s unforgivable the latter   so don’t blame me if you won’t take this advice                                                                                       and the family breaks up   and your children grow old and blind in front of a TV set                                                                                                       seeing   movies you wouldn’t let them see when they were young
***
The eager note on my door said “Call me,  call when you get in!” so I quickly threw  a few tangerines into my overnight bag,  straightened my eyelids and shoulders, and headed straight for the door. It was autumn  by the time I got around the corner, oh all unwilling to be either pertinent or bemused, but  the leaves were brighter than grass on the sidewalk! Funny, I thought, that the lights are on this late  and the hall door open; still up at this hour, a  champion jai-alai player like himself? Oh fie!  for shame! What a host, so zealous! And he was there in the hall, flat on a sheet of blood that ran down the stairs. I did appreciate it. There are few  hosts who so thoroughly prepare to greet a guest  only casually invited, and that several months ago.
***
“Turn back!” was all she snapped out as she passed  in a red dress that caught sunrays through mist.  I saw her lurch upwind, kick off spiked heels,  climb out to the edge of a knife-sharp rockpile, and, arms outstretched, lead the sea’s tympani,  lure the din, guiding the steamy waves  to shore. Will the Almighty answer me? she sang out to the ocean’s rising octaves, as blown palms pointed scarflike fronds to land.  Earlier that Sunday, she had prayed to a black Christ in a church on the island, droned verses for a safe calm, and trekked homeward to board white louvered windows for the storm.  She had refused the chapel’s sanctuary to ask the ocean why the wind ripped homes  and would again. Her anger captured me, and stayed when I saw rain gleam on red ginger,  drench trumpets islanders call yellow-bells,  and soak ixora. Bonelike bits of shells and conchs lay on the beach as on an altar. Silent, I watched her. Under a blank sky,  where waves broke over coral, in thick haze,  pitched forward to hear the whirlwind’s reply,  she shook a fist, then opened hands in praise.
***
At night Chinamen jump   on Asia with a thump while in our willful way   we, in secret, play affectionate games and bruise   our knees like China’s shoes. The birds push apples through   grass the moon turns blue, these apples roll beneath   our buttocks like a heath full of Chinese thrushes   flushed from China’s bushes. As we love at night   birds sing out of sight, Chinese rhythms beat   through us in our heat, the apples and the birds   move us like soft words, we couple in the grace   of that mysterious race.
***
515 Madison Avenue   door to heaven? portal stopped realities and eternal licentiousness or at least the jungle of impossible eagerness your marble is bronze and your lianas elevator cables   swinging from the myth of ascending I would join or declining the challenge of racial attractions they zing on (into the lynch, dear friends) while everywhere love is breathing draftily like a doorway linking 53rd with 54th the east-bound with the west-bound traffic by 8,000,000s   o midtown tunnels and the tunnels, too, of Holland where is the summit where all aims are clear   the pin-point light upon a fear of lust as agony’s needlework grows up around the unicorn   and fences him for milk- and yoghurt-work when I see Gianni I know he’s thinking of John Ericson   playing the Rachmaninoff 2nd or Elizabeth Taylor   taking sleeping-pills and Jane thinks of Manderley   and Irkutsk while I cough lightly in the smog of desire   and my eyes water achingly imitating the true blue a sight of Manahatta in the towering needle multi-faceted insight of the fly in the stringless labyrinth   Canada plans a higher place than the Empire State Building   I am getting into a cab at 9th Street and 1st Avenue   and the Negro driver tells me about a $120 apartment   “where you can’t walk across the floor after 10 at night   not even to pee, cause it keeps them awake downstairs” no, I don’t like that “well, I didn’t take it” perfect in the hot humid morning on my way to work   a little supper-club conversation for the mill of the gods you were there always and you know all about these things   as indifferent as an encyclopedia with your calm brown eyes   it isn’t enough to smile when you run the gauntlet you’ve got to spit like Niagara Falls on everybody or Victoria Falls or at least the beautiful urban fountains of Madrid   as the Niger joins the Gulf of Guinea near the Menemsha Bar that is what you learn in the early morning passing Madison Avenue   where you’ve never spent any time and stores eat up light I have always wanted to be near it though the day is long (and I don’t mean Madison Avenue)   lying in a hammock on St. Mark’s Place sorting my poems   in the rancid nourishment of this mountainous island   they are coming and we holy ones must go is Tibet historically a part of China? as I historically   belong to the enormous bliss of American death
***
He lives, who last night flopped from a log  Into the creek, and all night by an ankle  Lay pinned to the flood, dead as a nail  But for the skin of the teeth of his dog. I brought him boiled eggs and broth.  He coughed and waved his spoon And sat up saying he would dine alone,  Being fatigue itself after that bath. I sat without in the sun with the dog.  Wearing a stocking on the ailing foot,  In monster crutches, he hobbled out,  And addressed the dog in bitter rage. He told the yellow hound, his rescuer,  Its heart was bad, and it ought Not wander by the creek at night; If all his dogs got drowned he would be poor. He stroked its head and disappeared in the shed  And came out with a stone mallet in his hands  And lifted that rocky weight of many pounds  And let it lapse on top of the dog's head. I carted off the carcass, dug it deep. Then he came too with what a thing to lug,  Or pour on a dog’s grave, his thundermug,  And poured it out and went indoors to sleep. I saw him sleepless in the pane of glass  Looking wild-eyed at sunset, then the glare  Blinded the glass—only a red square  Burning a house burning in the wilderness.
***
1 In the evening haze darkening on the hills,  purple of the eternal,  a last bird crosses over,  ‘flop flop,’ adoring only the instant.     2 Nine years ago, in a plane that rumbled all night  above the Atlantic, I could see, lit up by lightning bolts jumping out of it,  a thunderhead formed like the face of my brother, looking down  on blue, lightning-flashed moments of the Atlantic.     3 He used to tell me, “What good is the day?  On some hill of despair  the bonfire you kindle can light the great sky— though it’s true, of course, to make it burn  you have to throw yourself in ...”     4 Wind tears itself hollow in the eaves of these ruins, ghost-flute of snowdrifts that build out there in the dark:  upside-down ravines  into which night sweeps our cast wings, our ink-spattered feathers.     5 I listen. I hear nothing. Only the cow, the cow of such  hollowness, mooing down the bones.     6 Is that a rooster? He thrashes in the snow  for a grain. Finds  it. Rips it into flames. Flaps. Crows.  Flames bursting out of his brow.     7 How many nights must it take one such as me to learn that we aren’t, after all, made from that bird that flies out of its ashes,  that for us as we go up in flames, our one work is to open ourselves, to be the flames? 
***
I walked from my house down Coolidge Street last night  And air, beginning movement in the trees,  Shook down a hushing from the branches.  On either side of me the houses Like solid shadow, blocks of silence In the violet light, so dim without dimming.  And I saw you, Saul, my old friend, waiting  For me at the corner where our two streets met. I wanted to ask you what it was like to die But you said first, as if you didn’t want to tell me,  ‘The doctors made me better. We can run again.’  You ran behind me (the way you always did), Your slow strides lunging; though they never could keep up  This time they stayed right there at my heels.  Turning, I saw one pocket inside out Clapping on your coat front like a white hand.  Your breath quickened, scrawled in the chilling air  Like mine, and vanishing. We ran on a field of snow.  Our footsteps pattered the smooth crust,  Each one feeling like it might break through.  Around us the pure white kindled under violet. And we returned by train. Sitting next to you, Staring through the window, I saw your body Lying like a dark slash in the snow, Your arms flung up, your legs crossed, Even as I heard you next to me Still struggling to catch your breath. You were just  Pretending to be alive—remembering to breathe.  Lumbering under living weight, saying you were cured,  Your flushed cheeks—all just to put me at my ease,  Afraid that your death might embarrass me, even then  Saul, you were more a friend to me than you were dead.  But in my mind the question was still circling: What is it like to die? But how could I catch you In a lie which you intended as a kindness? Beside you on the train, hurtling back Into the strange familiarity of Coolidge Street, Remaining silent, I returned the courtesy.
***
         1 In late winter I sometimes glimpse bits of steam   coming up from some fault in the old snow and bend close and see it is lung-colored   and put down my nose and know the chilly, enduring odor of bear.          2 I take a wolf’s rib and whittle it sharp at both ends and coil it up and freeze it in blubber and place it out   on the fairway of the bears. And when it has vanished I move out on the bear tracks, roaming in circles until I come to the first, tentative, dark   splash on the earth. And I set out running, following the splashes of blood wandering over the world. At the cut, gashed resting places I stop and rest, at the crawl-marks where he lay out on his belly to overpass some stretch of bauchy ice I lie out dragging myself forward with bear-knives in my fists.          3 On the third day I begin to starve, at nightfall I bend down as I knew I would   at a turd sopped in blood, and hesitate, and pick it up, and thrust it in my mouth, and gnash it down,   and rise and go on running.          4 On the seventh day, living by now on bear blood alone, I can see his upturned carcass far out ahead, a scraggled,   steamy hulk, the heavy fur riffling in the wind. I come up to him and stare at the narrow-spaced, petty eyes,   the dismayed face laid back on the shoulder, the nostrils flared, catching perhaps the first taint of me as he died. I hack a ravine in his thigh, and eat and drink,   and tear him down his whole length and open him and climb in and close him up after me, against the wind, and sleep.          5 And dream of lumbering flatfooted over the tundra, stabbed twice from within, splattering a trail behind me, splattering it out no matter which way I lurch, no matter which parabola of bear-transcendence,   which dance of solitude I attempt, which gravity-clutched leap, which trudge, which groan.          6 Until one day I totter and fall— fall on this stomach that has tried so hard to keep up,   to digest the blood as it leaked in, to break up and digest the bone itself: and now the breeze   blows over me, blows off the hideous belches of ill-digested bear blood   and rotted stomach and the ordinary, wretched odor of bear, blows across my sore, lolled tongue a song or screech, until I think I must rise up   and dance. And I lie still.          7 I awaken I think. Marshlights reappear, geese come trailing again up the flyway. In her ravine under old snow the dam-bear lies, licking lumps of smeared fur and drizzly eyes into shapes with her tongue. And one hairy-soled trudge stuck out before me, the next groaned out, the next, the next, the rest of my days I spend wandering: wondering what, anyway, was that sticky infusion, that rank flavor of blood, that poetry, by which I lived?
***
For I can snore like a bullhorn or play loud music or sit up talking with any reasonably sober Irishman and Fergus will only sink deeper into his dreamless sleep, which goes by all in one flash,   but let there be that heavy breathing or a stifled come-cry anywhere in the house and he will wrench himself awake and make for it on the run—as now, we lie together, after making love, quiet, touching along the length of our bodies,   familiar touch of the long-married, and he appears—in his baseball pajamas, it happens, the neck opening so small he has to screw them on— and flops down between us and hugs us and snuggles himself to sleep, his face gleaming with satisfaction at being this very child. In the half darkness we look at each other and smile and touch arms across this little, startlingly muscled body— this one whom habit of memory propels to the ground of his making, sleeper only the mortal sounds can sing awake, this blessing love gives again into our arms.
***
When first I walked here I hobbled   along ties set too close together   for a boy to step easily on each.   I thought my stride one day would reach every other and from then on   I would walk in time with the way   toward that Lobachevskian haze   up ahead where the two rails meet.   Here we put down our pennies, dark,   on shined steel; they trembled, fell still;   then the locomotive out of Attleboro rattling its berserk wheel-rods into perfect circles,   brightened them into wafers, the way a fork   mashes into view the inner light of a carrot   in a stew. In this late March sunshine,   crossing the trees at the angle of a bow   when it effleurages out of the chanterelle   the C three octaves above middle C,   the vertical birthwood remembers   its ascent lines, shrunken by half, exactly   back down, each tree on its fallen summer.   Back then, these rocks often asked   blood offerings—but this one, once, asked bone,   the time Billy Wallace tripped and broke out his front teeth. Fitted with gold replicas, he asked, speaking more brightly, “What good   are golden teeth, given what we’ve got to eat?” Nebuchadnezzar spent seven years down on all fours   eating vetch and alfalfa, ruminating the mouth-feel of “bloom” and “wither,”   until he was whole. If you held a grass blade between both thumbs   and blew hard you could blurt a shriek   out of it—like that beseeching leaves oaks   didn’t drop last winter just now scratch   on a breeze. Maybe Billy, lured by bones’ memory, comes back sometimes, too, to the Seekonk Woods,   to stand in the past and just look at it. Here he might kneel, studying this clump of grass, as a god might inspect the strands of a human sneeze   that percusses through. Or he might stray   into the now untrafficked whistling-lanes   of the mourning doves, who used to call and call   into the future, and give a start, as though,   this very minute, by awful coincidence,   they reach it. And at last traipse off down the tracks, with arrhythmic gait,   as wanderers must do once they realize:   the over-the-unknown route, too, ends up   where time wants. On this spot I skinned the muskrat. The musk breezed away.   I buried the rat. Of the fur I made a hat, which as soon as put on   began to rot off, causing my scalp to crawl.   In circles, of course, keeping to the skull. One day could this scrap of damp skin crawl all the way off, and the whole organism   follow? To do what? Effuse with musk,   or rot with rat? When, a quarter- turn after the sun, the half-moon,   too, goes down and we find ourselves   in the night's night, then somewhere   hereabouts in the dark must be death.   Knowledge of it beforehand is surely among   existence’s most spectacular feats—and yet right here,   on this ordinary afternoon, in these woods,   with a name meaning “black goose” in Wampanoag,   or in modern Seekonkese, “slob blowing fat nose,” this unlikely event happens—a creature   walking the tracks knows it will come.   Then too long to touch every tie, his stride   is now just too short to reach every other, and so he is to be still the wanderer, the hirtle   of too much replaced by the common limp   of too little. But he almost got there. Almost stepped in consonance with the liturgical,   sleeping gods’ snores you can hear humming up from former times inside the ties. He almost   set foot in that border zone where what follows   blows back, shimmering everything, making   walking like sleepwalking, railroad tracks   a country lane on a spring morning,   on which a man, limping but blissful,   makes his way homeward, his lips, suppled   by kissing to bunch up like that, blowing these short strands of hollowed-out air,   haunted by future, into a tune on the tracks.   I think I’m about to be shocked awake. As I was in childhood, when I battered myself   back to my senses against a closed door, or woke up hanging out of an upstairs window.   Somnambulism was my attempt to slip under cover of nightmare across no father’s land   and embrace a phantasm. If only I had found a way to enter his hard time   served at labor by day, by night in solitary,   and put my arms around him in reality,   I might not now be remaking him in memory still; anti-alchemizing bass kettle’s   golden reverberations back down to hair, flesh, blood, bone, the base metals.   I want to crawl face down in the fields and graze on the wild strawberries, my clothes   stained pink, even for seven years   if I must, if they exist. I want to lie out on my back under the thousand stars and think   my way up among them, through them,   and a little distance past them, and attain   a moment of absolute ignorance, if I can, if human mentality lets us. I have always intended to live forever; but not until now, to live now. The moment   I have done one or the other, I here swear,   no one will have to drag me , I’ll come   but never will I agree to burn my words. The poplar logs creosoted asleep under the tracks   have stopped snoring. Maybe they’ve   already waked up. The bow saws at G.   An oak leaf rattles on its tree. The rails   may never meet, O fellow Euclideans,   for you, for me. So what if we groan.   That’s our noise. Laughter is our stuttering   in a language we can’t speak yet. Behind,   the world made of wishes goes dark. Ahead,   if not now then never, shines what is.
***
The two boys lean out on the railing   of the front porch, looking up. Behind them they can hear their mother   in one room watching “Name That Tune,”   their father in another watching   a Walter Cronkite Special, the TVs   turned up high and higher till they   each can’t hear the other’s show.   The older boy is saying that no matter   how many stars you counted there were   always more stars beyond them   and beyond the stars black space   going on forever in all directions,   so that even if you flew up millions and millions of years   you’d be no closer to the end   of it than they were now here on the porch on Tuesday night   in the middle of summer. The younger boy can think somehow   only of his mother’s closet,   how he likes to crawl in back   behind the heavy drapery of shirts, nightgowns and dresses,   into the sheer black where no matter how close he holds   his hand up to his face there’s no hand ever, no face to hold it to. A woman from another street is calling to her stray cat or dog,   clapping and whistling it in, and farther away deep in the city   sirens now and again veer in and out of hearing. The boys edge closer, shoulder   to shoulder now, sad Ptolemies, the older looking up, the younger as he thinks back straight ahead into the black leaves of the maple where the street lights flicker like another watery skein of stars. “Name That Tune” and Walter Cronkite struggle like rough water to rise above each other. And the woman now comes walking in a nightgown down the middle of the street, clapping and whistling, while the older boy goes on about what light years are, and solar winds, black holes, and how the sun is cooling and what will happen to them all when it is cold.
***
The bud stands for all things, even for those things that don’t flower, for everything flowers, from within, of self-blessing;   though sometimes it is necessary to reteach a thing its loveliness, to put a hand on its brow of the flower and retell it in words and in touch it is lovely until it flowers again from within, of self-blessing;   as Saint Francis put his hand on the creased forehead of the sow, and told her in words and in touch   blessings of earth on the sow, and the sow   began remembering all down her thick length,   from the earthen snout all the way through the fodder and slops to the spiritual curl of the tail,   from the hard spininess spiked out from the spine   down through the great broken heart to the sheer blue milken dreaminess spurting and shuddering   from the fourteen teats into the fourteen mouths sucking and blowing beneath them: the long, perfect loveliness of sow.
***
1 The old watch: their thick eyes puff and foreclose by the moon. The young, heads  trailed by the beginnings of necks, shiver, in the guarantee they shall be bodies. In the frog pond the vapor trail of a SAC bomber creeps, I hear its drone, drifting, high up  in immaculate ozone.          2 And I hear, coming over the hills, America singing, her varied carols I hear: crack of deputies' rifles practicing their aim on stray dogs at night,  sput of cattleprod, TV going on about the smells of the human body, curses of the soldier as he poisons, burns, grinds, and stabs  the rice of the world, with open mouth, crying strong, hysterical curses.          3 And by paddies in Asia bones wearing a few shadows walk down a dirt road, smashed  bloodsuckers on their heel, knowing  flesh thrown down in the sunshine  dogs shall eat and flesh flung into the air shall be seized by birds, shoulder blades smooth, unmarked by old feather-holes,  hands rivered by blue, erratic wanderings of the blood,  eyes crinkled shut at almost seeing  the drifting sun that gives us our lives.
***
The man splitting wood in the daybreak  looks strong, as though, if one weakened,  one could turn to him and he would help.  Gus Newland was strong. When he split wood  he struck hard, flashing the bright steel  through the air so hard the hard maple  leapt apart, as it’s feared marriages will do  in countries reluctant to permit divorce,  and even willow, which, though stacked  to dry a full year, on being split actually weeps—totem wood, therefore,  to the married-until-death—sunders  with many little lip-wetting gasp-noises. But Gus is dead. We could turn to our fathers,  but they help us only by the unperplexed  looking-back of the numerals cut into headstones.  Or to our mothers, whose love, so devastated,  can’t, even in spring, break through the hard earth.  Our spouses weaken at the same rate we do.  We have to hold our children up to lean on them.  Everyone who could help goes or hasn’t arrived.  What about the man splitting wood in the daybreak,  who looked strong? That was years ago. That was me.
***
1 I can support it no longer.  Laughing ruefully at myself  For all I claim to have suffered  I get up. Damned nightmarer! It is New Hampshire out here, It is nearly the dawn. The song of the whippoorwill stops And the dimension of depth seizes everything. 2 The whistles of a peabody bird go overhead  Like a needle pushed five times through the air,  They enter the leaves, and come out little changed. The air is so still That as they go off through the trees The love songs of birds do not get any fainter. 3 The last memory I have Is of a flower that cannot be touched, Through the bloom of which, all day,  Fly crazed, missing bees. 4 As I climb sweat gets up my nostrils,  For an instant I think I am at the sea, One summer off Cap Ferrat we watched a black seagull  Straining for the dawn, we stood in the surf, Grasshoppers splash up where I step, The mountain laurel crashes at my thighs. 5 There is something joyous in the elegies  Of birds. They seem Caught up in a formal delight, Though the mourning dove whistles of despair. But at last in the thousand elegies The dead rise in our hearts, On the brink of our happiness we stop  Like someone on a drunk starting to weep. 6 I kneel at a pool, I look through my face At the bacteria I think I see crawling through the moss. My face sees me, The water stirs, the face,  Looking preoccupied, Gets knocked from its bones. 7 I weighed eleven pounds At birth, having stayed on Two extra weeks in the womb.  Tempted by room and fresh air  I came out big as a policeman  Blue-faced, with narrow red eyes.  It was eight days before the doctor  Would scare my mother with me. Turning and craning in the vines  I can make out through the leaves The old, shimmering nothingness, the sky. 8 Green, scaly moosewoods ascend,  Tenants of the shaken paradise, At every wind last night’s rain  Comes splattering from the leaves, It drops in flurries and lies there,  The footsteps of some running start. 9 From a rock A waterfall, A single trickle like a strand of wire,  Breaks into beads halfway down. I know The birds fly off But the hug of the earth wraps With moss their graves and the giant boulders. 10 In the forest I discover a flower. The invisible life of the thing Goes up in flames that are invisible,  Like cellophane burning in the sunlight. It burns up. Its drift is to be nothing. In its covertness it has a way Of uttering itself in place of itself, Its blossoms claim to float in the Empyrean, A wrathful presence on the blur of the ground. The appeal to heaven breaks off. The petals begin to fall, in self-forgiveness. It is a flower. On this mountainside it is dying.
***
I can feel she has got out of bed.   That means it is seven a.m. I have been lying with eyes shut,   thinking, or possibly dreaming, of how she might look if, at breakfast,   I spoke about the hidden place in her   which, to me, is like a soprano’s tremolo, and right then, over toast and bramble jelly, if such things are possible, she came. I imagine she would show it while trying to conceal it. I imagine her hair would fall about her face and she would become apparently downcast, as she does at a concert when she is moved. The hypnopompic play passes, and I open my eyes and there she is, next to the bed,   bending to a low drawer, picking over   various small smooth black, white, and pink items of underwear. She bends   so low her back runs parallel to the earth, but there is no sway in it, there is little burden, the day has hardly begun. The two mounds of muscles for walking, leaping, lovemaking, lift toward the east—what can I say? Simile is useless; there is nothing like them on earth. Her breasts fall full; the nipples are deep pink in the glare shining up through the iron bars of the gate under the earth where those who could not love press, wanting to be born again.   I reach out and take her wrist and she falls back into bed and at once starts unbuttoning my pajamas.   Later, when I open my eyes, there she is again,   rummaging in the same low drawer.   The clock shows eight. Hmmm.   With huge, silent effort of great, mounded muscles the earth has been turning. She takes a piece of silken cloth from the drawer and stands up. Under the falls   of hair her face has become quiet and downcast,   as if she will be, all day among strangers,   looking down inside herself at our rapture.
***
The house is so quiet now The vacuum cleaner sulks in the corner closet,  Its bag limp as a stopped lung, its mouth  Grinning into the floor, maybe at my Slovenly life, my dog-dead youth. I’ve lived this way long enough, But when my old woman died her soul Went into that vacuum cleaner, and I can’t bear  To see the bag swell like a belly, eating the dust  And the woolen mice, and begin to howl Because there is old filth everywhere She used to crawl, in the corner and under the stair.  I know now how life is cheap as dirt,  And still the hungry, angry heart  Hangs on and howls, biting at air.
***
Naked before the glass she said,   “I see my body as no man has,   Nor any shall unless I wed And naked in a stranger’s house   Stand timid beside his bed. There is no pity in the flesh.” “Or else I shall grow old,” she said,   “Alone, and change my likeliness   For a vile, slack shape, a head Shriveled with thinking wickedness   Against the day I must be dead   And eaten by my crabbed wish.” “One or the other way,” she said,   “How shall I know the difference, When wrinkles come, to spinster or bride?   Whether to marry or burn is bless- ed best, O stranger to my bed,   There is no pity in the flesh.” 
***
I tell you that I see her still At the dark entrance of the hall. One gas lamp burning near her shoulder  Shone also from her other side  Where hung the long inaccurate glass  Whose pictures were as troubled water.  An immense shadow had its hand  Between us on the floor, and seemed  To hump the knuckles nervously,  A giant crab readying to walk,  Or a blanket moving in its sleep. You will remember, with a smile  Instructed by movies to reminisce,  How strict her corsets must have been,  How the huge arrangements of her hair  Would certainly betray the least  Impassionate displacement there.  It was no rig for dallying, And maybe only marriage could  Derange that queenly scaffolding— As when a great ship, coming home,  Coasts in the harbor, dropping sail And loosing all the tackle that had laced Her in the long lanes ....                                        I know We need not draw this figure out. But all that whalebone came from whales.  And all the whales lived in the sea,  In calm beneath the troubled glass,  Until the needle drew their blood. I see her standing in the hall, Where the mirror’s lashed to blood and foam,  And the black flukes of agony Beat at the air till the light blows out.
***
The gregarious dark is shifting  when she puts her second drink,  the free one, half on the coaster.  The tipped wine poised at the brim  is the beginning of the bad girl  she’ll promise never to be again  tomorrow, who can taunt him now  to prove he doesn’t love her and never could: her hand slides  up his thigh until he tenses— ‘My little prig, don’t you want  to fuck me?’ the bad girl she couldn’t be at home, his wife on ice.  All he can do is smile back as though she’s made a harmless  good-natured joke, and struggle  not to look around to see who’s heard, who’s watching. He wants  to smash the wine glass in her face  so he can know for once exactly what he’s done wrong;  but he places it instead back safely on the coaster quickly before she sees. Never cautious enough, he is prepared  even if she knocks it over to go down on his hands and knees  and wipe it up, kind and forgiving.  In all ways careful to acquit himself  so that tomorrow when she says she doesn’t deserve him, he’s too good,  he can believe her. Tomorrow  will be his happy hour. There won’t be  anything she wouldn’t do for him.
***
It is true, that even in the best-run state  Such things will happen; it is true, What’s done is done. The law, whereby we hate  Our hatred, sees no fire in the flue But by the smoke, and not for thought alone  It punishes, but for the thing that’s done. And yet there is the horror of the fact,  Though we knew not the man. To die in jail,  To be beaten to death, to know the act  Of personal fury before the eyes can fail  And the man die against the cold last wall  Of the lonely world—and neither is that all: There is the terror too of each man’s thought,  That knows not, but must quietly suspect  His neighbor, friend, or self of being taught  To take an attitude merely correct;  Being frightened of his own cold image in  The glass of government, and his own sin, Frightened lest senate house and prison wall Be quarried of one stone, lest righteous and high  Look faintly smiling down and seem to call  A crime the welcome chance of liberty,  And any man an outlaw who aggrieves  The patriotism of a pair of thieves.
***
Up in the billboard, over old South Station,  the Captain, all wide grin and ruddy cheek,  held up a golden shot of Cutty Sark high as the skyline where the sunset spread a gold fan from the twig-like spars and rigging  of a departing clipper ship. Above the picture the dull haze of a real sun rose,  dragging the day up with it. Seven o’clock.  The agitated horns, brakes, fingers, and catcalls  down below me were already merging  and channeling everybody on to warehouse,  factory, department store and office. My father and uncle talking over all the goods  to be received that day, the goods delivered,  their two reflections in the window floating  like blurry ghosts within the Captain’s grin,  their voices raised a little above the soft  erratic humming of the big machines,  the riveters and pressers, warming, rousing:  The Century order, did it get out last night?  And had the buckles come from Personal?  Who’d go do Jaffey? Who’d diddle Abramowitz  and Saperstein? Those cocksucking sons of bitches,  cut their balls off if they fuck with us . . . How automatically at any provocation  I can aim the words at anybody now, woman or man, the reverberating angry this, not that, in ‘pussy’, ‘cocksucker’,  ‘fuckhead’, hammered down so far inside me  it’s almost too securely there to feel. But I was thirteen then, and for the first  time old enough to have my father say these things in front of me, which must have meant  I was a man now too, I listened (blushing,  ashamed of blushing) for clues of what it was  I had become, or was supposed to be: It did and didn’t have to do with bodies,  being a man, it wasn’t fixed in bodies, but somehow passed between them, going to  by being taken from, ever departing,  ever arriving, unstoppable as money,  and moving in a limited supply  it seemed to follow where the money went.  Being a man was something that you did  to other men, which meant a woman was what other men became when you would do them.  Either you gave a fucking, or you took one,  did or were done to, it was simple as that. Somebody shouted from beyond the office  that Tony had passed out in the can again.  ‘The lush, the no good lush,’ my uncle said,  ‘get him the fuck out of here for good, will ya.’ The stall door swung back, scrawled with giant cocks,  tits, asses and cunts, beyond which in the shadows  my father was gently wrestling with the man,  trying to hold him steady while his free hand  shimmied the tangled shorts and trousers up  over the knees and hips, and even got the shirt tucked in, the pants zipped deftly enough  for Tony not to notice, though he did. Even then I knew they’d fire him, and that it wasn’t gratitude at all that made the man weep inconsolably, his head bowed, nodding, as my father led him  to the elevator, still with his arm around him,  patting his shoulder, easing him through the door.  I knew the tenderness that somewhere else  could possibly have been a lover’s or a father’s  could here be only an efficient way to minimize the trouble. And yet it seemed  somehow my father was too adept at it,  too skillful, not to feel it in some way. And feeling it not to need to pull back,  to separate himself from what the rest of him was doing, which was why, I think, his face throughout was blank, expressionless like the faces of the presidents on the bills  he handed Tony as the door slid shut.  The men fast at the riveters and pressers  and the long row of women at the Singers  were oil now even more than men or women,  mute oil in the loud revving of the place,  a blur of hands on automatic pilot, slipping leather through the pumping needles, under the thrusting rods, the furious hammers,  the nearly invisible whirring of the blades.  ‘Come on now, Al, it’s time,’ my father said,  and the Captain seemed to grin a little wider,  as if his pleasure there at the end of his  unending day grew freer, more disencumbered,  because he saw me at the start of mine,  under my father’s arm, his soft voice broken  against the noise into an unfollowable tune  of favors and petty cash, and how much ass  he had to kiss to get me this, and I should be a man now and not disappoint him.
***
1 Among the high-branching, leafless boughs  Above the roof-peaks of the town,  Snowflakes unnumberably come down. I watched out of the attic window  The laced sway of family trees,  Intricate genealogies Whose strict, reserved gentility,  Trembling, impossible to bow,  Received the appalling fall of snow. All during Sunday afternoon,  Not storming, but befittingly,  Out of a still, grey, devout sky, The snowflakes fell, until all shapes Went under, and thickening, drunken lines  Cobwebbed the sleep of solemn pines. Up in the attic, among many things  Inherited and out of style,  I cried, then fell asleep awhile, Waking at night now, as the snow- flakes from darkness to darkness go  Past yellow lights in the street below. 2 I cried because life is hopeless and beautiful.  And like a child I cried myself to sleep High in the head of the house, feeling the hull  Beneath me pitch and roll among the steep  Mountains and valleys of the many years    That brought me to tears. Down in the cellar, furnace and washing machine,  Pump, fuse-box, water heater, work their hearts  Out at my life, which narrowly runs between  Them and this cemetery of spare parts For discontinued men, whose hats and canes     Are my rich remains. And women, their portraits and wedding gowns  Stacked in the corners, brooding in wooden trunks;  And children’s rattles, books about lions and clowns;  And headless, hanging dresses swayed like drunks  Whenever a living footstep shakes the floor;    I mention no more; But what I thought today, that made me cry,  Is this, that we live in two kinds of thing:  The powerful trees, thrusting into the sky Their black patience, are one, and that branching Relation teaches how we endure and grow;     The other is the snow, Falling in a white chaos from the sky,  As many as the sands of all the seas, As all the men who died or who will die, As stars in heaven, as leaves of all the trees;  As Abraham was promised of his seed;    Generations bleed, Till I, high in the tower of my time  Among familiar ruins, began to cry For accident, sickness, justice, war and crime,  Because all died, because I had to die. The snow fell, the trees stood, the promise kept,    And a child I slept.
***
People are putting up storm windows now,  Or were, this morning, until the heavy rain  Drove them indoors. So, coming home at noon,  I saw storm windows lying on the ground,  Frame-full of rain; through the water and glass I saw the crushed grass, how it seemed to stream  Away in lines like seaweed on the tide Or blades of wheat leaning under the wind. The ripple and splash of rain on the blurred glass  Seemed that it briefly said, as I walked by,  Something I should have liked to say to you, Something ... the dry grass bent under the pane  Brimful of bouncing water ... something of  A swaying clarity which blindly echoes This lonely afternoon of memories And missed desires, while the wintry rain  (Unspeakable, the distance in the mind!) Runs on the standing windows and away. 
***
Old court. Old chain net hanging in frayed links from the rim,   the metal blackboard dented, darker where the ball   for over thirty years has kissed it, the blacktop buckling,   the white lines nearly worn away. Old common ground   where none of the black men warming up before the basket   will answer or even look in my direction when I ask   if I can run too, the chill a mutual understanding,   one of the last we share, letting me join them here,   if nowhere else, by not letting me forget I don’t belong. Old court. Old courtesy, handshake, exchange of names,   in the early days of bussing, between assassinations,   before our quaint welcoming of them had come to seem,   even to ourselves, the haughty overflow of wealth   so thoroughly our own we didn’t need to see it.   Old beautiful delusion in those courtly gestures   that everything now beyond our wanting just to play was out of bounds, and we were free between the white lines   of whatever we assumed we each of us assumed. Old court, old dream dreamed by the weave, the trap,   the backdoor pass. Old fluid legacy, among the others, that conjures even now within our bodies and between them   such a useless, such an intimate forgetting, as in the moment   when you get a step on your defender and can tell exactly by how another man comes at you where your own man is and, without looking, lob the ball   up in the air so perfectly as he arrives that in a single motion he can catch and finger roll it in. Old court. Old dwindling cease fire, with no hope of peace,   that we silently turn away from when the game is over,   hurrying back (as if believing contact meant contagion)   to our separate tribes, to the cleansing fires of what,   despite ourselves, we momentarily forgot: old lore, old news, old burning certitudes we can’t   stoke high or hot enough, yet won’t stop ever stoking   until whatever it is we think we are anneals and toughens into an impenetrable shield.
***
The cursive crawl, the squared-off characters  these by themselves delight, even without  a meaning, in a foreign language, in Chinese, for instance, or when skaters curve  all day across the lake, scoring their white  records in ice. Being intelligible, these winding ways with their audacities  and delicate hesitations, they become  miraculous, so intimately, out there at the pen’s point or brush’s tip, do world  and spirit wed. The small bones of the wrist  balance against great skeletons of stars  exactly; the blind bat surveys his way  by echo alone. Still, the point of style  is character. The universe induces a different tremor in every hand, from the  check-forger’s to that of the Emperor Hui Tsung, who called his own calligraphy  the ‘Slender Gold.’ A nervous man writes nervously of a nervous world, and so on. Miraculous. It is as though the world were a great writing. Having said so much,  let us allow there is more to the world  than writing: continental faults are not  bare convoluted fissures in the brain.  Not only must the skaters soon go home;  also the hard inscription of their skates is scored across the open water, which long  remembers nothing, neither wind nor wake.
***
This morning we shall spend a few minutes  Upon the study of symbolism, which is basic  To the nature of money. I show you this nickel.  Icons and cryptograms are written all over The nickel: one side shows a hunchbacked bison  Bending his head and curling his tail to accommodate  The circular nature of money. Over him arches UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, and, squinched in  Between that and his rump, E PLURIBUS UNUM, A Roman reminiscence that appears to mean  An indeterminately large number of things  All of which are the same. Under the bison A straight line giving him a ground to stand on  Reads FIVE CENTS. And on the other side of our nickel  There is the profile of a man with long hair  And a couple of feathers in the hair; we know  Somehow that he is an American Indian, and  He wears the number nineteen-thirty-six. Right in front of his eyes the word LIBERTY, bent  To conform with the curve of the rim, appears  To be falling out of the sky Y first; the Indian  Keeps his eyes downcast and does not notice this;  To notice it, indeed, would be shortsighted of him.  So much for the iconography of one of our nickels,  Which is now becoming a rarity and something of  A collectors’ item: for as a matter of fact There is almost nothing you can buy with a nickel,  The representative American Indian was destroyed  A hundred years or so ago, and his descendants’  Relations with liberty are maintained with reservations,  Or primitive concentration camps; while the bison,  Except for a few examples kept in cages, Is now extinct. Something like that, I think, Is what Keats must have meant in his celebrated  Ode on a Grecian Urn.                                Notice, in conclusion, A number of circumstances sometimes overlooked  Even by experts: (a) Indian and bison, Confined to obverse and reverse of the coin,  Can never see each other; (b) they are looking  In opposite directions, the bison past The Indian’s feathers, the Indian past The bison’s tail; (c) they are upside down To one another; (d) the bison has a human face  Somewhat resembling that of Jupiter Ammon. I hope that our studies today will have shown you  Something of the import of symbolism With respect to the understanding of what is symbolized.
***
1 Water roared everywhere around us, yet from the bank  all we could see of it were quick spumes and flashes  here and there, in among the boulders. Cautiously,  as if they might awaken, we clambered over  the gigantic slabs and humps, the sun-baked ovals  lumpy as hammered clay, and saw downstream below us  only the vague shapes of others, almost billowy,  like magnified amoebas, stretching away to even  vaguer ones beyond them, turning the narrow  streambed through the valley to a lunar seam.        2 Easing ourselves down over the massive sides (we were hot and tired, eager for the pools below)  we could make out older water in the rough grain,  undulating and immobile currents, band swirled on band,  mica-speckled, cloudy, each seeming to move off,  as it faded, through the stone—each one a glacial rune,  each boulder an innumerable pebble in the ice sheet’s tidal suck and drag: two hundred thousand years,  two billion, five, the molten core, spoor  of gasses in the vast night, at our fingertips.        3 Then the pool: your clothes shed, with one hand braced  against the rock ledge you had slipped into the hip-high  rushing water, and were wading out, bent over, reaching  like the blind before you for the slippery boulder you slid across, pushing against the white weight of the pouring mist, your skin goose-fleshed, speckled  bright as mica, and then, part mist yourself, you turned back, smiling, calling though I couldn’t  hear you, calling and waving for me to climb down  to where you were, to join you there. And so I did.
***
This morning, between two branches of a tree  Beside the door, epeira once again Has spun and signed his tapestry and trap.  I test his early-warning system and It works, he scrambles forth in sable with  The yellow hieroglyph that no one knows  The meaning of. And I remember now How yesterday at dusk the nighthawks came  Back as they do about this time each year, Grey squadrons with the slashes white on wings  Cruising for bugs beneath the bellied cloud.  Now soon the monarchs will be drifting south,  And then the geese will go, and then one day  The little garden birds will not be here.  See how many leaves already have Withered and turned; a few have fallen, too.  Change is continuous on the seamless web,  Yet moments come like this one, when you feel  Upon your heart a signal to attend The definite announcement of an end Where one thing ceases and another starts;  When like the spider waiting on the web  You know the intricate dependencies  Spreading in secret through the fabric vast  Of heaven and earth, sending their messages  Ciphered in chemistry to all the kinds, The whisper down the bloodstream: it is time.
***
By the dry road the fathers cough and spit, This is their room. They are the ones who hung  That bloody sun upon the southern wall  And crushed the armored beetle to the floor. The father’s skin is seamed and dry, the map Of that wild region where they drained the swamp  And set provision out that they might sit, Of history the cracked precipitate, Until the glass be shattered and the sun  Descend to burn the prosperous flesh away  Of the filthy world, so vilely fathered on  The fathers, such black cinders, sitting there. Old pioneers, what lecheries remain? When schoolgirls pass, what whispers of their skirts,  Cold gleams of flesh, solicit in your veined And gemlike eyes the custom of desire? None now. Their eyes are sunk in ancient flesh,  And the sarcastic triumph of the mind They now enjoy, letting their lust alone  Who may have kin but have no longer kind. Neither tomorrow’s monstrous tumor nor  The reformation of the past they wish,  Who hold in silent colloquy the world  A shrivelled apple in the hand of God. They hang at night their somber flags aloft, And through the amorous dark pursue their theme  Of common images, that sleep may show  Them done with all disasters but the one.
***
On the long shore, lit by the moon   To show them properly alone,   Two lovers suddenly embraced   So that their shadows were as one.   The ordinary night was graced For them by the swift tide of blood   That silently they took at flood,   And for a little time they prized    Themselves emparadised. Then, as if shaken by stage-fright   Beneath the hard moon’s bony light,   They stood together on the sand   Embarrassed in each other’s sight   But still conspiring hand in hand,   Until they saw, there underfoot, As though the world had found them out,   The goose fish turning up, though dead,    His hugely grinning head. There in the china light he lay,   Most ancient and corrupt and grey.   They hesitated at his smile, Wondering what it seemed to say To lovers who a little while Before had thought to understand,   By violence upon the sand, The only way that could be known      To make a world their own. It was a wide and moony grin Together peaceful and obscene; They knew not what he would express,   So finished a comedian He might mean failure or success,   But took it for an emblem of Their sudden, new and guilty love To be observed by, when they kissed,      That rigid optimist. So he became their patriarch, Dreadfully mild in the half-dark. His throat that the sand seemed to choke,   His picket teeth, these left their mark   But never did explain the joke That so amused him, lying there While the moon went down to disappear   Along the still and tilted track    That bears the zodiac.
***
Unwitting accomplice in the scheme of law  she thought to violate, man-set as it was,  and, here, inconsequential as the sun  at midnight, drought at flood-time— when she heard a baby in the tall reeds  at the river’s brink, she was nobody’s  daughter, subject of no rule but the one his need for her established  as she knelt down to quell his crying  with a little tune just seeing him there  had taught her how to hum.                                         Now as then, it is the same tune, timelessly in time,  your mother hums as she kneels down  beside your little barge of foam, smiling to see you smile when she wrings out from the sponge a ragged string  of water over the chest and belly,  the dimpled loins, the bud so far  from flowering, and the foot slick as a fish your hand tries to hold up till it slips back splashing with such mild turbulence that she laughs,  and you laugh to see her laugh. Here now, as it was then, it is still so many years before the blood’s smeared  over doorposts, before the Nile clots  with the first-born, and the women  wailing,wailing throughout the city; here now again is the kingdom of pleasure,  where they are safe still, mother and child,  from the chartered rod of the Fathers,  and where a father can still pray, Lord,  Jealous Chooser, Devouring Law, keep  away from them, just keep away.
***
A door sunk in a hillside, with a bolt thick as the boy’s arm, and behind that door  the walls of ice, melting a blue, faint light,  an air of cedar branches, sawdust, fern:  decaying seasons keeping from decay. A summer guest, the boy had never seen  (a servant told him of it) how the lake froze three foot thick, how farmers came with teams,  with axe and saw, to cut great blocks of ice,  translucid, marbled, glittering in the sun,  load them on sleds and drag them up the hill  to be manhandled down the narrow path  and set in courses for the summer’s keeping,  the kitchen uses and luxuriousness of the great houses. And he heard how once a team and driver drowned in the break of spring:  the man’s cry melting from the ice that summer  frightened the sherbet-eaters off the terrace. Dust of the cedar, lost and evergreen  among the slowly blunting water walls where the blade edge melted and the steel saw’s bite  was rounded out, and the horse and rider drowned in the red sea’s blood, I was the silly child who dreamed that riderless cry, and saw the guests run from a ghostly wall, so long before the winter house fell with the summer house, and the houses, Egypt, the great houses, had an end.
***